Physics is the scientific study of matter, its fundamental constituents, its motion and behavior through space and time, and the related entities of energy and force.
It is one of the most fundamental scientific disciplines.
A scientist who specializes in the field of physics is called a physicist.
Physics is one of the oldest academic disciplines.
Over much of the past two millennia, physics, chemistry, biology, and certain branches of mathematics were part of natural philosophy, but during the Scientific Revolution in the 17th century, these natural sciences branched into separate research endeavors.
Physics intersects with many interdisciplinary areas of research, such as biophysics and quantum chemistry, and the boundaries of physics are not rigidly defined.
New ideas in physics often explain the fundamental mechanisms studied by other sciences and suggest new avenues of research in these and other academic disciplines, such as mathematics and philosophy.
Advances in physics often enable new technologies.
For example, advances in the understanding of electromagnetism, solid-state physics, and nuclear physics led directly to the development of technologies that have transformed modern society, such as television, computers, domestic appliances, and nuclear weapons; advances in thermodynamics led to the development of industrialization; and advances in mechanics inspired the development of calculus.
The word physics comes from the Latin physica ('study of nature'), which itself is a borrowing of the Greek φυσική (phusikḗ 'natural science'), a term derived from φύσις (phúsis 'origin, nature, property').
Astronomy is one of the oldest natural sciences.
Early civilizations dating before 3000 BCE, such as the Sumerians, ancient Egyptians, and the Indus Valley Civilization, had a predictive knowledge and a basic awareness of the motions of the Sun, Moon, and stars.
The stars and planets, believed to represent gods, were often worshipped.
While the explanations for the observed positions of the stars were often unscientific and lacking in evidence, these early observations laid the foundation for later astronomy, as the stars were found to traverse great circles across the sky, which could not explain the positions of the planets.
According to Asger Aaboe, the origins of Western astronomy can be found in Mesopotamia, and all Western efforts in the exact sciences are descended from late Babylonian astronomy.
Egyptian astronomers left monuments showing knowledge of the constellations and the motions of the celestial bodies, while Greek poet Homer wrote of various celestial objects in his Iliad and Odyssey; later Greek astronomers provided names, which are still used today, for most constellations visible from the Northern Hemisphere.
Natural philosophy has its origins in Greece during the Archaic period (650 BCE – 480 BCE), when pre-Socratic philosophers like Thales rejected non-naturalistic explanations for natural phenomena and proclaimed that every event had a natural cause.
They proposed ideas verified by reason and observation, and many of their hypotheses proved successful in experiment; for example, atomism was found to be correct approximately 2000 years after it was proposed by Leucippus and his pupil Democritus.
During the classical period in Greece (6th, 5th and 4th centuries BCE) and in Hellenistic times, natural philosophy developed along many lines of inquiry.
Aristotelian physics was influential for about two millennia.
His approach mixed some limited observation with logical deductive arguments, but did not rely on experimental verification of deduced statements.
Aristotle's foundational work in Physics, though very imperfect, formed a framework against which later thinkers further developed the field.
His approach is entirely superseded today.
He explained ideas such as motion (and gravity) with the theory of four elements.
Aristotle believed that each of the four classical elements (air, fire, water, earth) had its own natural place.
Because of their differing densities, each element will revert to its own specific place in the atmosphere.
So, because of their weights, fire would be at the top, air underneath fire, then water, then lastly earth.
He also stated that when a small amount of one element enters the natural place of another, the less abundant element will automatically go towards its own natural place.
For example, if there is a fire on the ground, the flames go up into the air in an attempt to go back into its natural place where it belongs.
His laws of motion included: that heavier objects will fall faster, the speed being proportional to the weight and the speed of the object that is falling depends inversely on the density object it is falling through (e.
He also stated that, when it comes to violent motion (motion of an object when a force is applied to it by a second object), the speed that object moves will only be as fast or strong as the measure of force applied to it.
The problem of motion and its causes was studied carefully, leading to the philosophical notion of a "prime mover" as the ultimate source of all motion in the world (Book 8 of his treatise Physics).
The Western Roman Empire fell to invaders and internal decay in the fifth century, resulting in a decline in intellectual pursuits in western Europe.
By contrast, the Eastern Roman Empire (usually known as the Byzantine Empire) resisted the attacks from invaders and continued to advance various fields of learning, including physics.
In the sixth century, John Philoponus challenged the dominant Aristotelian approach to science although much of his work was focused on Christian theology.
In the sixth century, Isidore of Miletus created an important compilation of Archimedes' works that are copied in the Archimedes Palimpsest.
Islamic scholarship inherited Aristotelian physics from the Greeks and during the Islamic Golden Age developed it further.
The most notable innovations under Islamic scholarship were in the field of optics and vision, which came from the works of many scientists like Ibn Sahl, Al-Kindi, Ibn al-Haytham, Al-Farisi and Avicenna.
In his Book of Optics (also known as Kitāb al-Manāẓir) Ibn al-Haytham presented the idea of light rays as an alternative to the ancient Greek idea about visual rays.
Like Ptolemy, Ibn al-Haytham applied controlled experiments, verifying the laws of refraction and reflection with the new concept of light rays, but still lacking the concept of image formation.
Physics became a separate science when early modern Europeans used experimental and quantitative methods to discover what are now considered to be the laws of physics.
Major developments in this period include the replacement of the geocentric model of the Solar System with the heliocentric Copernican model, the laws governing the motion of planetary bodies (determined by Johannes Kepler between 1609 and 1619), Galileo's pioneering work on telescopes and observational astronomy in the 16th and 17th centuries, and Isaac Newton's discovery and unification of the laws of motion and universal gravitation (that would come to bear his name).
Newton, and separately Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, developed calculus, the mathematical study of continuous change, and Newton applied it to solve physical problems.
The discovery of laws in thermodynamics, chemistry, and electromagnetics resulted from research efforts during the Industrial Revolution as energy needs increased.
By the end of the 19th century, theories of thermodynamics, mechanics, and electromagnetics matched a wide variety of observations.
Taken together these theories became the basis for what would later be called classical physics.
A few experimental results remained inexplicable.
Classical electromagnetism presumed a medium, an luminiferous aether to support the propagation of waves, but this medium could not be detected.
The intensity of light from hot glowing blackbody objects did not match the predictions of thermodynamics and electromagnetism.
The character of electron emission of illuminated metals differed from predictions.
These failures, seemingly insignificant in the big picture would upset the physics world in first two decades of the 20th century.
Modern physics began in the early 20th century with the work of Max Planck in quantum theory and Albert Einstein's theory of relativity.
Both of these theories came about due to inaccuracies in classical mechanics in certain situations.
Classical mechanics predicted that the speed of light depends on the motion of the observer, which could not be resolved with the constant speed predicted by Maxwell's equations of electromagnetism.
This discrepancy was corrected by Einstein's theory of special relativity, which replaced classical mechanics for fast-moving bodies and allowed for a constant speed of light.
Black-body radiation provided another problem for classical physics, which was corrected when Planck proposed that the excitation of material oscillators is possible only in discrete steps proportional to their frequency.
This, along with the photoelectric effect and a complete theory predicting discrete energy levels of electron orbitals, led to the theory of quantum mechanics improving on classical physics at very small scales.
Quantum mechanics would come to be pioneered by Werner Heisenberg, Erwin Schrödinger and Paul Dirac.
From this early work, and work in related fields, the Standard Model of particle physics was derived.
Following the discovery of a particle with properties consistent with the Higgs boson at CERN in 2012, all fundamental particles predicted by the Standard Model, and no others, appear to exist; however, physics beyond the Standard Model, with theories such as supersymmetry, is an active area of research.
Areas of mathematics in general are important to this field, such as the study of probabilities and groups.
Physics deals with a wide variety of systems, although certain theories are used by all physicists.
Each of these theories was experimentally tested numerous times and found to be an adequate approximation of nature.
These central theories are important tools for research into more specialized topics, and any physicist, regardless of their specialization, is expected to be literate in them.
These include classical mechanics, quantum mechanics, thermodynamics and statistical mechanics, electromagnetism, and special relativity.
In the first decades of the 20th century physics was revolutionized by the discoveries of quantum mechanics and relativity.
The changes were so fundamental that these new concepts became the foundation of "modern physics", with other topics becoming "classical physics".
The majority of applications of physics are essentially classical.
The laws of classical physics accurately describe systems whose important length scales are greater than the atomic scale and whose motions are much slower than the speed of light.
Outside of this domain, observations do not match predictions provided by classical mechanics.
Classical physics includes the traditional branches and topics that were recognized and well-developed before the beginning of the 20th century—classical mechanics, thermodynamics, and electromagnetism.
Classical mechanics is concerned with bodies acted on by forces and bodies in motion and may be divided into statics (study of the forces on a body or bodies not subject to an acceleration), kinematics (study of motion without regard to its causes), and dynamics (study of motion and the forces that affect it); mechanics may also be divided into solid mechanics and fluid mechanics (known together as continuum mechanics), the latter include such branches as hydrostatics, hydrodynamics and pneumatics.
Acoustics is the study of how sound is produced, controlled, transmitted and received.
Important modern branches of acoustics include ultrasonics, the study of sound waves of very high frequency beyond the range of human hearing; bioacoustics, the physics of animal calls and hearing; and electroacoustics, the manipulation of audible sound waves using electronics.
Optics, the study of light, is concerned not only with visible light but also with infrared and ultraviolet radiation, which exhibit all of the phenomena of visible light except visibility, e.
Heat is a form of energy, the internal energy possessed by the particles of which a substance is composed; thermodynamics deals with the relationships between heat and other forms of energy.
Electricity and magnetism have been studied as a single branch of physics since the intimate connection between them was discovered in the early 19th century; an electric current gives rise to a magnetic field, and a changing magnetic field induces an electric current.
Electrostatics deals with electric charges at rest, electrodynamics with moving charges, and magnetostatics with magnetic poles at rest.
The discovery of relativity and of quantum mechanics in the first decades of the 20th century transformed the conceptual basis of physics without reducing the practical value of most of the physical theories developed up to that time.
Consequently the topics of physics have come to be divided into "classical physics" and "modern physics", with the latter category including effects related to quantum mechanics and relativity.
Classical physics is generally concerned with matter and energy on the normal scale of observation, while much of modern physics is concerned with the behavior of matter and energy under extreme conditions or on a very large or very small scale.
For example, atomic and nuclear physics study matter on the smallest scale at which chemical elements can be identified.
The physics of elementary particles is on an even smaller scale since it is concerned with the most basic units of matter; this branch of physics is also known as high-energy physics because of the extremely high energies necessary to produce many types of particles in particle accelerators.
On this scale, ordinary, commonsensical notions of space, time, matter, and energy are no longer valid.
The two chief theories of modern physics present a different picture of the concepts of space, time, and matter from that presented by classical physics.
Classical mechanics approximates nature as continuous, while quantum theory is concerned with the discrete nature of many phenomena at the atomic and subatomic level and with the complementary aspects of particles and waves in the description of such phenomena.
The theory of relativity is concerned with the description of phenomena that take place in a frame of reference that is in motion with respect to an observer; the special theory of relativity is concerned with motion in the absence of gravitational fields and the general theory of relativity with motion and its connection with gravitation.
Both quantum theory and the theory of relativity find applications in many areas of modern physics.
Physicists use the scientific method to test the validity of a physical theory.
By using a methodical approach to compare the implications of a theory with the conclusions drawn from its related experiments and observations, physicists are better able to test the validity of a theory in a logical, unbiased, and repeatable way.
To that end, experiments are performed and observations are made in order to determine the validity or invalidity of a theory.
A scientific law is a concise verbal or mathematical statement of a relation that expresses a fundamental principle of some theory, such as Newton's law of universal gravitation.
Theorists seek to develop mathematical models that both agree with existing experiments and successfully predict future experimental results, while experimentalists devise and perform experiments to test theoretical predictions and explore new phenomena.
Although theory and experiment are developed separately, they strongly affect and depend upon each other.
Progress in physics frequently comes about when experimental results defy explanation by existing theories, prompting intense focus on applicable modeling, and when new theories generate experimentally testable predictions, which inspire the development of new experiments (and often related equipment).
Physicists who work at the interplay of theory and experiment are called phenomenologists, who study complex phenomena observed in experiment and work to relate them to a fundamental theory.
Theoretical physics has historically taken inspiration from philosophy; electromagnetism was unified this way.
Beyond the known universe, the field of theoretical physics also deals with hypothetical issues, such as parallel universes, a multiverse, and higher dimensions.
Theorists invoke these ideas in hopes of solving particular problems with existing theories; they then explore the consequences of these ideas and work toward making testable predictions.
Experimental physics expands, and is expanded by, engineering and technology.
Experimental physicists who are involved in basic research design and perform experiments with equipment such as particle accelerators and lasers, whereas those involved in applied research often work in industry, developing technologies such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and transistors.
Feynman has noted that experimentalists may seek areas that have not been explored well by theorists.
Physics covers a wide range of phenomena, from elementary particles (such as quarks, neutrinos, and electrons) to the largest superclusters of galaxies.
Included in these phenomena are the most basic objects composing all other things.
Therefore, physics is sometimes called the "fundamental science".
Physics aims to describe the various phenomena that occur in nature in terms of simpler phenomena.
Thus, physics aims to both connect the things observable to humans to root causes, and then connect these causes together.
For example, the ancient Chinese observed that certain rocks (lodestone and magnetite) were attracted to one another by an invisible force.
This effect was later called magnetism, which was first rigorously studied in the 17th century.
But even before the Chinese discovered magnetism, the ancient Greeks knew of other objects such as amber, that when rubbed with fur would cause a similar invisible attraction between the two.
This was also first studied rigorously in the 17th century and came to be called electricity.
Thus, physics had come to understand two observations of nature in terms of some root cause (electricity and magnetism).
However, further work in the 19th century revealed that these two forces were just two different aspects of one force—electromagnetism.
This process of "unifying" forces continues today, and electromagnetism and the weak nuclear force are now considered to be two aspects of the electroweak interaction.
Physics hopes to find an ultimate reason (theory of everything) for why nature is as it is (see section Current research below for more information).
Research in physics is continually progressing on a large number of fronts.
In condensed matter physics, an important unsolved theoretical problem is that of high-temperature superconductivity.
Many condensed matter experiments are aiming to fabricate workable spintronics and quantum computers.
In particle physics, the first pieces of experimental evidence for physics beyond the Standard Model have begun to appear.
Foremost among these are indications that neutrinos have non-zero mass.
These experimental results appear to have solved the long-standing solar neutrino problem, and the physics of massive neutrinos remains an area of active theoretical and experimental research.
The Large Hadron Collider has already found the Higgs boson, but future research aims to prove or disprove the supersymmetry, which extends the Standard Model of particle physics.
Research on the nature of the major mysteries of dark matter and dark energy is also currently ongoing.
Although much progress has been made in high-energy, quantum, and astronomical physics, many everyday phenomena involving complexity, chaos, or turbulence are still poorly understood.
Complex problems that seem like they could be solved by a clever application of dynamics and mechanics remain unsolved; examples include the formation of sandpiles, nodes in trickling water, the shape of water droplets, mechanisms of surface tension catastrophes, and self-sorting in shaken heterogeneous collections.
These complex phenomena have received growing attention since the 1970s for several reasons, including the availability of modern mathematical methods and computers, which enabled complex systems to be modeled in new ways.
Complex physics has become part of increasingly interdisciplinary research, as exemplified by the study of turbulence in aerodynamics and the observation of pattern formation in biological systems.
I am an old man now, and when I die and go to heaven there are two matters on which I hope for enlightenment.
One is quantum electrodynamics, and the other is the turbulent motion of fluids.
And about the former I am rather optimistic.
The major fields of physics, along with their subfields and the theories and concepts they employ, are shown in the following table.
Since the 20th century, the individual fields of physics have become increasingly specialized, and today most physicists work in a single field for their entire careers.
Contemporary research in physics can be broadly divided into nuclear and particle physics; condensed matter physics; atomic, molecular, and optical physics; astrophysics; and applied physics.
Some physics departments also support physics education research and physics outreach.
Particle physics is the study of the elementary constituents of matter and energy and the interactions between them.
In addition, particle physicists design and develop the high-energy accelerators, detectors, and computer programs necessary for this research.
The field is also called "high-energy physics" because many elementary particles do not occur naturally but are created only during high-energy collisions of other particles.
Currently, the interactions of elementary particles and fields are described by the Standard Model.
The model accounts for the 12 known particles of matter (quarks and leptons) that interact via the strong, weak, and electromagnetic fundamental forces.
Dynamics are described in terms of matter particles exchanging gauge bosons (gluons, W and Z bosons, and photons, respectively).
The Standard Model also predicts a particle known as the Higgs boson.
In July 2012 CERN, the European laboratory for particle physics, announced the detection of a particle consistent with the Higgs boson, an integral part of the Higgs mechanism.
Nuclear physics is the field of physics that studies the constituents and interactions of atomic nuclei.
The most commonly known applications of nuclear physics are nuclear power generation and nuclear weapons technology, but the research has provided application in many fields, including those in nuclear medicine and magnetic resonance imaging, ion implantation in materials engineering, and radiocarbon dating in geology and archaeology.
Atomic, molecular, and optical physics (AMO) is the study of matter—matter and light—matter interactions on the scale of single atoms and molecules.
The three areas are grouped together because of their interrelationships, the similarity of methods used, and the commonality of their relevant energy scales.
All three areas include both classical, semi-classical and quantum treatments; they can treat their subject from a microscopic view (in contrast to a macroscopic view).
Atomic physics studies the electron shells of atoms.
Current research focuses on activities in quantum control, cooling and trapping of atoms and ions, low-temperature collision dynamics and the effects of electron correlation on structure and dynamics.
Atomic physics is influenced by the nucleus (see hyperfine splitting), but intra-nuclear phenomena such as fission and fusion are considered part of nuclear physics.
Molecular physics focuses on multi-atomic structures and their internal and external interactions with matter and light.
Optical physics is distinct from optics in that it tends to focus not on the control of classical light fields by macroscopic objects but on the fundamental properties of optical fields and their interactions with matter in the microscopic realm.
Condensed matter physics is the field of physics that deals with the macroscopic physical properties of matter.
In particular, it is concerned with the "condensed" phases that appear whenever the number of particles in a system is extremely large and the interactions between them are strong.
The most familiar examples of condensed phases are solids and liquids, which arise from the bonding by way of the electromagnetic force between atoms.
More exotic condensed phases include the superfluid and the Bose–Einstein condensate found in certain atomic systems at very low temperature, the superconducting phase exhibited by conduction electrons in certain materials, and the ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic phases of spins on atomic lattices.
Condensed matter physics is the largest field of contemporary physics.
Historically, condensed matter physics grew out of solid-state physics, which is now considered one of its main subfields.
The term condensed matter physics was apparently coined by Philip Anderson when he renamed his research group—previously solid-state theory—in 1967.
In 1978, the Division of Solid State Physics of the American Physical Society was renamed as the Division of Condensed Matter Physics.
Condensed matter physics has a large overlap with chemistry, materials science, nanotechnology and engineering.
Astrophysics and astronomy are the application of the theories and methods of physics to the study of stellar structure, stellar evolution, the origin of the Solar System, and related problems of cosmology.
Because astrophysics is a broad subject, astrophysicists typically apply many disciplines of physics, including mechanics, electromagnetism, statistical mechanics, thermodynamics, quantum mechanics, relativity, nuclear and particle physics, and atomic and molecular physics.
The discovery by Karl Jansky in 1931 that radio signals were emitted by celestial bodies initiated the science of radio astronomy.
Most recently, the frontiers of astronomy have been expanded by space exploration.
Perturbations and interference from the Earth's atmosphere make space-based observations necessary for infrared, ultraviolet, gamma-ray, and X-ray astronomy.
Physical cosmology is the study of the formation and evolution of the universe on its largest scales.
Albert Einstein's theory of relativity plays a central role in all modern cosmological theories.
In the early 20th century, Hubble's discovery that the universe is expanding, as shown by the Hubble diagram, prompted rival explanations known as the steady state universe and the Big Bang.
The Big Bang was confirmed by the success of Big Bang nucleosynthesis and the discovery of the cosmic microwave background in 1964.
The Big Bang model rests on two theoretical pillars: Albert Einstein's general relativity and the cosmological principle.
Cosmologists have recently established the ΛCDM model of the evolution of the universe, which includes cosmic inflation, dark energy, and dark matter.
Physics, as with the rest of science, relies on the philosophy of science and its "scientific method" to advance knowledge of the physical world.
The scientific method employs a priori and a posteriori reasoning as well as the use of Bayesian inference to measure the validity of a given theory.
Study of the philosophical issues surrounding physics, the philosophy of physics, involves issues such as the nature of space and time, determinism, and metaphysical outlooks such as empiricism, naturalism, and realism.
Many physicists have written about the philosophical implications of their work, for instance Laplace, who championed causal determinism, and Erwin Schrödinger, who wrote on quantum mechanics.
The mathematical physicist Roger Penrose has been called a Platonist by Stephen Hawking, a view Penrose discusses in his book, The Road to Reality.
Hawking referred to himself as an "unashamed reductionist" and took issue with Penrose's views.
Mathematics provides a compact and exact language used to describe the order in nature.
This was noted and advocated by Pythagoras, Plato, Galileo, and Newton.
Some theorists, like Hilary Putnam and Penelope Maddy, hold that logical truths, and therefore mathematical reasoning, depend on the empirical world.
This is usually combined with the claim that the laws of logic express universal regularities found in the structural features of the world, which may explain the peculiar relation between these fields.
Physics uses mathematics to organize and formulate experimental results.
From those results, precise or estimated solutions are obtained, or quantitative results, from which new predictions can be made and experimentally confirmed or negated.
The results from physics experiments are numerical data, with their units of measure and estimates of the errors in the measurements.
Technologies based on mathematics, like computation have made computational physics an active area of research.
Ontology is a prerequisite for physics, but not for mathematics.
It means physics is ultimately concerned with descriptions of the real world, while mathematics is concerned with abstract patterns, even beyond the real world.
Thus physics statements are synthetic, while mathematical statements are analytic.
Mathematics contains hypotheses, while physics contains theories.
Mathematics statements have to be only logically true, while predictions of physics statements must match observed and experimental data.
The distinction is clear-cut, but not always obvious.
For example, mathematical physics is the application of mathematics in physics.
Its methods are mathematical, but its subject is physical.
The problems in this field start with a "mathematical model of a physical situation" (system) and a "mathematical description of a physical law" that will be applied to that system.
Every mathematical statement used for solving has a hard-to-find physical meaning.
The final mathematical solution has an easier-to-find meaning, because it is what the solver is looking for.
Physics is a branch of fundamental science (also called basic science).
Physics is also called "the fundamental science" because all branches of natural science including chemistry, astronomy, geology, and biology are constrained by laws of physics.
Similarly, chemistry is often called the central science because of its role in linking the physical sciences.
For example, chemistry studies properties, structures, and reactions of matter (chemistry's focus on the molecular and atomic scale distinguishes it from physics).
Structures are formed because particles exert electrical forces on each other, properties include physical characteristics of given substances, and reactions are bound by laws of physics, like conservation of energy, mass, and charge.
Fundamental physics seeks to better explain and understand phenomena in all spheres, without a specific practical application as a goal, other than the deeper insight into the phenomema themselves.
Applied physics is a general term for physics research and development that is intended for a particular use.
An applied physics curriculum usually contains a few classes in an applied discipline, like geology or electrical engineering.
It usually differs from engineering in that an applied physicist may not be designing something in particular, but rather is using physics or conducting physics research with the aim of developing new technologies or solving a problem.
The approach is similar to that of applied mathematics.
Applied physicists use physics in scientific research.
For instance, people working on accelerator physics might seek to build better particle detectors for research in theoretical physics.
Physics is used heavily in engineering.
For example, statics, a subfield of mechanics, is used in the building of bridges and other static structures.
The understanding and use of acoustics results in sound control and better concert halls; similarly, the use of optics creates better optical devices.
An understanding of physics makes for more realistic flight simulators, video games, and movies, and is often critical in forensic investigations.
With the standard consensus that the laws of physics are universal and do not change with time, physics can be used to study things that would ordinarily be mired in uncertainty.
For example, in the study of the origin of the Earth, a physicist can reasonably model Earth's mass, temperature, and rate of rotation, as a function of time allowing the extrapolation forward or backward in time and so predict future or prior events.
It also allows for simulations in engineering that speed up the development of a new technology.
There is also considerable interdisciplinarity, so many other important fields are influenced by physics (e.
Usenet Physics FAQ – FAQ compiled by sci.
Chemistry is the scientific study of the properties and behavior of matter.
It is a physical science within the natural sciences that studies matter: composition, structure, properties, behavior and the changes they undergo during reactions with other substances.
Chemistry also addresses the nature of chemical bonds in chemical compounds.
In the scope of its subject, chemistry occupies an intermediate position between physics and biology.
It is sometimes called the central science because it provides a foundation for understanding both basic and applied scientific disciplines at a fundamental level.
For example, chemistry explains aspects of plant growth (botany), the formation of igneous rocks (geology), how atmospheric ozone is formed and how environmental pollutants are degraded (ecology), the properties of the soil on the Moon (cosmochemistry), how medications work (pharmacology), and how to collect DNA evidence at a crime scene (forensics).
Chemistry has existed under various names since ancient times.
It has evolved, and now chemistry encompasses various areas of specialisation, or subdisciplines, that continue to increase in number and interrelate to create further interdisciplinary fields of study.
The applications of various fields of chemistry are used frequently for economic purposes in the chemical industry.
The word chemistry comes from a modification during the Renaissance of the word alchemy, which referred to an earlier set of practices that encompassed elements of chemistry, metallurgy, philosophy, astrology, astronomy, mysticism, and medicine.
Alchemy is often associated with the quest to turn lead or other base metals into gold, though alchemists were also interested in many of the questions of modern chemistry.
The modern word alchemy in turn is derived from the Arabic word al-kīmīā (الكیمیاء).
This may have Egyptian origins since al-kīmīā is derived from the Ancient Greek χημία, which is in turn derived from the word Kemet, which is the ancient name of Egypt in the Egyptian language.
Alternately, al-kīmīā may derive from χημεία 'cast together'.
The current model of atomic structure is the quantum mechanical model.
Traditional chemistry starts with the study of elementary particles, atoms, molecules, substances, metals, crystals and other aggregates of matter.
Matter can be studied in solid, liquid, gas and plasma states, in isolation or in combination.
The interactions, reactions and transformations that are studied in chemistry are usually the result of interactions between atoms, leading to rearrangements of the chemical bonds which hold atoms together.
Such behaviors are studied in a chemistry laboratory.
The chemistry laboratory stereotypically uses various forms of laboratory glassware.
However glassware is not central to chemistry, and a great deal of experimental (as well as applied/industrial) chemistry is done without it.
A chemical reaction is a transformation of some substances into one or more different substances.
The basis of such a chemical transformation is the rearrangement of electrons in the chemical bonds between atoms.
It can be symbolically depicted through a chemical equation, which usually involves atoms as subjects.
The number of atoms on the left and the right in the equation for a chemical transformation is equal.
Energy and entropy considerations are invariably important in almost all chemical studies.
Chemical substances are classified in terms of their structure, phase, as well as their chemical compositions.
They can be analyzed using the tools of chemical analysis, e.
Scientists engaged in chemical research are known as chemists.
Most chemists specialize in one or more sub-disciplines.
In chemistry, matter is defined as anything that has rest mass and volume (it takes up space) and is made up of particles.
The particles that make up matter have rest mass as well – not all particles have rest mass, such as the photon.
Matter can be a pure chemical substance or a mixture of substances.
The atom is the basic unit of chemistry.
It consists of a dense core called the atomic nucleus surrounded by a space occupied by an electron cloud.
The nucleus is made up of positively charged protons and uncharged neutrons (together called nucleons), while the electron cloud consists of negatively charged electrons which orbit the nucleus.
In a neutral atom, the negatively charged electrons balance out the positive charge of the protons.
The nucleus is dense; the mass of a nucleon is approximately 1,836 times that of an electron, yet the radius of an atom is about 10,000 times that of its nucleus.
The atom is also the smallest entity that can be envisaged to retain the chemical properties of the element, such as electronegativity, ionization potential, preferred oxidation state(s), coordination number, and preferred types of bonds to form (e.
A chemical element is a pure substance which is composed of a single type of atom, characterized by its particular number of protons in the nuclei of its atoms, known as the atomic number and represented by the symbol Z.
The mass number is the sum of the number of protons and neutrons in a nucleus.
Although all the nuclei of all atoms belonging to one element will have the same atomic number, they may not necessarily have the same mass number; atoms of an element which have different mass numbers are known as isotopes.
For example, all atoms with 6 protons in their nuclei are atoms of the chemical element carbon, but atoms of carbon may have mass numbers of 12 or 13.
The standard presentation of the chemical elements is in the periodic table, which orders elements by atomic number.
The periodic table is arranged in groups, or columns, and periods, or rows.
The periodic table is useful in identifying periodic trends.
A compound is a pure chemical substance composed of more than one element.
The properties of a compound bear little similarity to those of its elements.
The standard nomenclature of compounds is set by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC).
Organic compounds are named according to the organic nomenclature system.
The names for inorganic compounds are created according to the inorganic nomenclature system.
When a compound has more than one component, then they are divided into two classes, the electropositive and the electronegative components.
In addition the Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) has devised a method to index chemical substances.
In this scheme each chemical substance is identifiable by a number known as its CAS registry number.
A molecule is the smallest indivisible portion of a pure chemical substance that has its unique set of chemical properties, that is, its potential to undergo a certain set of chemical reactions with other substances.
However, this definition only works well for substances that are composed of molecules, which is not true of many substances (see below).
Molecules are typically a set of atoms bound together by covalent bonds, such that the structure is electrically neutral and all valence electrons are paired with other electrons either in bonds or in lone pairs.
Thus, molecules exist as electrically neutral units, unlike ions.
When this rule is broken, giving the "molecule" a charge, the result is sometimes named a molecular ion or a polyatomic ion.
However, the discrete and separate nature of the molecular concept usually requires that molecular ions be present only in well-separated form, such as a directed beam in a vacuum in a mass spectrometer.
Charged polyatomic collections residing in solids (for example, common sulfate or nitrate ions) are generally not considered "molecules" in chemistry.
Some molecules contain one or more unpaired electrons, creating radicals.
Most radicals are comparatively reactive, but some, such as nitric oxide (NO) can be stable.
The "inert" or noble gas elements (helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon and radon) are composed of lone atoms as their smallest discrete unit, but the other isolated chemical elements consist of either molecules or networks of atoms bonded to each other in some way.
Identifiable molecules compose familiar substances such as water, air, and many organic compounds like alcohol, sugar, gasoline, and the various pharmaceuticals.
However, not all substances or chemical compounds consist of discrete molecules, and indeed most of the solid substances that make up the solid crust, mantle, and core of the Earth are chemical compounds without molecules.
These other types of substances, such as ionic compounds and network solids, are organized in such a way as to lack the existence of identifiable molecules per se.
Instead, these substances are discussed in terms of formula units or unit cells as the smallest repeating structure within the substance.
Examples of such substances are mineral salts (such as table salt), solids like carbon and diamond, metals, and familiar silica and silicate minerals such as quartz and granite.
One of the main characteristics of a molecule is its geometry often called its structure.
While the structure of diatomic, triatomic or tetra-atomic molecules may be trivial, (linear, angular pyramidal etc.
A chemical substance is a kind of matter with a definite composition and set of properties.
A collection of substances is called a mixture.
Examples of mixtures are air and alloys.
The mole is a unit of measurement that denotes an amount of substance (also called chemical amount).
One mole is defined to contain exactly 6.
Molar concentration is the amount of a particular substance per volume of solution, and is commonly reported in mol/dm3.
In addition to the specific chemical properties that distinguish different chemical classifications, chemicals can exist in several phases.
For the most part, the chemical classifications are independent of these bulk phase classifications; however, some more exotic phases are incompatible with certain chemical properties.
A phase is a set of states of a chemical system that have similar bulk structural properties, over a range of conditions, such as pressure or temperature.
Physical properties, such as density and refractive index tend to fall within values characteristic of the phase.
The phase of matter is defined by the phase transition, which is when energy put into or taken out of the system goes into rearranging the structure of the system, instead of changing the bulk conditions.
Sometimes the distinction between phases can be continuous instead of having a discrete boundary; in this case the matter is considered to be in a supercritical state.
When three states meet based on the conditions, it is known as a triple point and since this is invariant, it is a convenient way to define a set of conditions.
The most familiar examples of phases are solids, liquids, and gases.
Many substances exhibit multiple solid phases.
For example, there are three phases of solid iron (alpha, gamma, and delta) that vary based on temperature and pressure.
A principal difference between solid phases is the crystal structure, or arrangement, of the atoms.
Another phase commonly encountered in the study of chemistry is the aqueous phase, which is the state of substances dissolved in aqueous solution (that is, in water).
Less familiar phases include plasmas, Bose–Einstein condensates and fermionic condensates and the paramagnetic and ferromagnetic phases of magnetic materials.
While most familiar phases deal with three-dimensional systems, it is also possible to define analogs in two-dimensional systems, which has received attention for its relevance to systems in biology.
Atoms sticking together in molecules or crystals are said to be bonded with one another.
A chemical bond may be visualized as the multipole balance between the positive charges in the nuclei and the negative charges oscillating about them.
More than simple attraction and repulsion, the energies and distributions characterize the availability of an electron to bond to another atom.
The chemical bond can be a covalent bond, an ionic bond, a hydrogen bond or just because of Van der Waals force.
Each of these kinds of bonds is ascribed to some potential.
These potentials create the interactions which hold atoms together in molecules or crystals.
In many simple compounds, valence bond theory, the Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion model (VSEPR), and the concept of oxidation number can be used to explain molecular structure and composition.
An ionic bond is formed when a metal loses one or more of its electrons, becoming a positively charged cation, and the electrons are then gained by the non-metal atom, becoming a negatively charged anion.
The two oppositely charged ions attract one another, and the ionic bond is the electrostatic force of attraction between them.
For example, sodium (Na), a metal, loses one electron to become an Na+ cation while chlorine (Cl), a non-metal, gains this electron to become Cl−.
The ions are held together due to electrostatic attraction, and that compound sodium chloride (NaCl), or common table salt, is formed.
In a covalent bond, one or more pairs of valence electrons are shared by two atoms: the resulting electrically neutral group of bonded atoms is termed a molecule.
Atoms will share valence electrons in such a way as to create a noble gas electron configuration (eight electrons in their outermost shell) for each atom.
Atoms that tend to combine in such a way that they each have eight electrons in their valence shell are said to follow the octet rule.
However, some elements like hydrogen and lithium need only two electrons in their outermost shell to attain this stable configuration; these atoms are said to follow the duet rule, and in this way they are reaching the electron configuration of the noble gas helium, which has two electrons in its outer shell.
Similarly, theories from classical physics can be used to predict many ionic structures.
With more complicated compounds, such as metal complexes, valence bond theory is less applicable and alternative approaches, such as the molecular orbital theory, are generally used.
In the context of chemistry, energy is an attribute of a substance as a consequence of its atomic, molecular or aggregate structure.
Since a chemical transformation is accompanied by a change in one or more of these kinds of structures, it is invariably accompanied by an increase or decrease of energy of the substances involved.
Some energy is transferred between the surroundings and the reactants of the reaction in the form of heat or light; thus the products of a reaction may have more or less energy than the reactants.
A reaction is said to be exergonic if the final state is lower on the energy scale than the initial state; in the case of endergonic reactions the situation is the reverse.
A reaction is said to be exothermic if the reaction releases heat to the surroundings; in the case of endothermic reactions, the reaction absorbs heat from the surroundings.
Chemical reactions are invariably not possible unless the reactants surmount an energy barrier known as the activation energy.
This exponential dependence of a reaction rate on temperature is known as the Arrhenius equation.
The activation energy necessary for a chemical reaction to occur can be in the form of heat, light, electricity or mechanical force in the form of ultrasound.
A related concept free energy, which also incorporates entropy considerations, is a very useful means for predicting the feasibility of a reaction and determining the state of equilibrium of a chemical reaction, in chemical thermodynamics.
There exist only limited possible states of energy for electrons, atoms and molecules.
These are determined by the rules of quantum mechanics, which require quantization of energy of a bound system.
The atoms/molecules in a higher energy state are said to be excited.
The molecules/atoms of substance in an excited energy state are often much more reactive; that is, more amenable to chemical reactions.
The phase of a substance is invariably determined by its energy and the energy of its surroundings.
When the intermolecular forces of a substance are such that the energy of the surroundings is not sufficient to overcome them, it occurs in a more ordered phase like liquid or solid as is the case with water (H2O); a liquid at room temperature because its molecules are bound by hydrogen bonds.
Whereas hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is a gas at room temperature and standard pressure, as its molecules are bound by weaker dipole–dipole interactions.
The transfer of energy from one chemical substance to another depends on the size of energy quanta emitted from one substance.
However, heat energy is often transferred more easily from almost any substance to another because the phonons responsible for vibrational and rotational energy levels in a substance have much less energy than photons invoked for the electronic energy transfer.
Thus, because vibrational and rotational energy levels are more closely spaced than electronic energy levels, heat is more easily transferred between substances relative to light or other forms of electronic energy.
For example, ultraviolet electromagnetic radiation is not transferred with as much efficacy from one substance to another as thermal or electrical energy.
The existence of characteristic energy levels for different chemical substances is useful for their identification by the analysis of spectral lines.
Different kinds of spectra are often used in chemical spectroscopy, e.
IR, microwave, NMR, ESR, etc.
Spectroscopy is also used to identify the composition of remote objects – like stars and distant galaxies – by analyzing their radiation spectra.
The term chemical energy is often used to indicate the potential of a chemical substance to undergo a transformation through a chemical reaction or to transform other chemical substances.
When a chemical substance is transformed as a result of its interaction with another substance or with energy, a chemical reaction is said to have occurred.
A chemical reaction is therefore a concept related to the "reaction" of a substance when it comes in close contact with another, whether as a mixture or a solution; exposure to some form of energy, or both.
It results in some energy exchange between the constituents of the reaction as well as with the system environment, which may be designed vessels—often laboratory glassware.
Chemical reactions can result in the formation or dissociation of molecules, that is, molecules breaking apart to form two or more molecules or rearrangement of atoms within or across molecules.
Chemical reactions usually involve the making or breaking of chemical bonds.
Oxidation, reduction, dissociation, acid–base neutralization and molecular rearrangement are some examples of common chemical reactions.
A chemical reaction can be symbolically depicted through a chemical equation.
While in a non-nuclear chemical reaction the number and kind of atoms on both sides of the equation are equal, for a nuclear reaction this holds true only for the nuclear particles viz.
The sequence of steps in which the reorganization of chemical bonds may be taking place in the course of a chemical reaction is called its mechanism.
A chemical reaction can be envisioned to take place in a number of steps, each of which may have a different speed.
Many reaction intermediates with variable stability can thus be envisaged during the course of a reaction.
Reaction mechanisms are proposed to explain the kinetics and the relative product mix of a reaction.
Many physical chemists specialize in exploring and proposing the mechanisms of various chemical reactions.
Several empirical rules, like the Woodward–Hoffmann rules often come in handy while proposing a mechanism for a chemical reaction.
According to the IUPAC gold book, a chemical reaction is "a process that results in the interconversion of chemical species.
An additional caveat is made, in that this definition includes cases where the interconversion of conformers is experimentally observable.
Such detectable chemical reactions normally involve sets of molecular entities as indicated by this definition, but it is often conceptually convenient to use the term also for changes involving single molecular entities (i.
An ion is a charged species, an atom or a molecule, that has lost or gained one or more electrons.
When an atom loses an electron and thus has more protons than electrons, the atom is a positively charged ion or cation.
When an atom gains an electron and thus has more electrons than protons, the atom is a negatively charged ion or anion.
Cations and anions can form a crystalline lattice of neutral salts, such as the Na+ and Cl− ions forming sodium chloride, or NaCl.
Examples of polyatomic ions that do not split up during acid–base reactions are hydroxide (OH−) and phosphate (PO43−).
Plasma is composed of gaseous matter that has been completely ionized, usually through high temperature.
A substance can often be classified as an acid or a base.
There are several different theories which explain acid–base behavior.
The simplest is Arrhenius theory, which states that an acid is a substance that produces hydronium ions when it is dissolved in water, and a base is one that produces hydroxide ions when dissolved in water.
According to Brønsted–Lowry acid–base theory, acids are substances that donate a positive hydrogen ion to another substance in a chemical reaction; by extension, a base is the substance which receives that hydrogen ion.
A third common theory is Lewis acid–base theory, which is based on the formation of new chemical bonds.
Lewis theory explains that an acid is a substance which is capable of accepting a pair of electrons from another substance during the process of bond formation, while a base is a substance which can provide a pair of electrons to form a new bond.
There are several other ways in which a substance may be classified as an acid or a base, as is evident in the history of this concept.
Acid strength is commonly measured by two methods.
One measurement, based on the Arrhenius definition of acidity, is pH, which is a measurement of the hydronium ion concentration in a solution, as expressed on a negative logarithmic scale.
Thus, solutions that have a low pH have a high hydronium ion concentration and can be said to be more acidic.
The other measurement, based on the Brønsted–Lowry definition, is the acid dissociation constant (Ka), which measures the relative ability of a substance to act as an acid under the Brønsted–Lowry definition of an acid.
That is, substances with a higher Ka are more likely to donate hydrogen ions in chemical reactions than those with lower Ka values.
Redox (reduction-oxidation) reactions include all chemical reactions in which atoms have their oxidation state changed by either gaining electrons (reduction) or losing electrons (oxidation).
Substances that have the ability to oxidize other substances are said to be oxidative and are known as oxidizing agents, oxidants or oxidizers.
An oxidant removes electrons from another substance.
Similarly, substances that have the ability to reduce other substances are said to be reductive and are known as reducing agents, reductants, or reducers.
A reductant transfers electrons to another substance and is thus oxidized itself.
And because it "donates" electrons it is also called an electron donor.
Oxidation and reduction properly refer to a change in oxidation number—the actual transfer of electrons may never occur.
Thus, oxidation is better defined as an increase in oxidation number, and reduction as a decrease in oxidation number.
Although the concept of equilibrium is widely used across sciences, in the context of chemistry, it arises whenever a number of different states of the chemical composition are possible, as for example, in a mixture of several chemical compounds that can react with one another, or when a substance can be present in more than one kind of phase.
A system of chemical substances at equilibrium, even though having an unchanging composition, is most often not static; molecules of the substances continue to react with one another thus giving rise to a dynamic equilibrium.
Thus the concept describes the state in which the parameters such as chemical composition remain unchanged over time.
Chemical reactions are governed by certain laws, which have become fundamental concepts in chemistry.
The history of chemistry spans a period from the ancient past to the present.
Since several millennia BC, civilizations were using technologies that would eventually form the basis of the various branches of chemistry.
Examples include extracting metals from ores, making pottery and glazes, fermenting beer and wine, extracting chemicals from plants for medicine and perfume, rendering fat into soap, making glass, and making alloys like bronze.
Chemistry was preceded by its protoscience, alchemy, which operated a non-scientific approach to understanding the constituents of matter and their interactions.
Despite being unsuccessful in explaining the nature of matter and its transformations, alchemists set the stage for modern chemistry by performing experiments and recording the results.
Robert Boyle, although skeptical of elements and convinced of alchemy, played a key part in elevating the "sacred art" as an independent, fundamental and philosophical discipline in his work The Sceptical Chymist (1661).
While both alchemy and chemistry are concerned with matter and its transformations, the crucial difference was given by the scientific method that chemists employed in their work.
Chemistry, as a body of knowledge distinct from alchemy, became an established science with the work of Antoine Lavoisier, who developed a law of conservation of mass that demanded careful measurement and quantitative observations of chemical phenomena.
The history of chemistry afterwards is intertwined with the history of thermodynamics, especially through the work of Willard Gibbs.
The definition of chemistry has changed over time, as new discoveries and theories add to the functionality of the science.
The term "chymistry", in the view of noted scientist Robert Boyle in 1661, meant the subject of the material principles of mixed bodies.
In 1663, the chemist Christopher Glaser described "chymistry" as a scientific art, by which one learns to dissolve bodies, and draw from them the different substances on their composition, and how to unite them again, and exalt them to a higher perfection.
The 1730 definition of the word "chemistry", as used by Georg Ernst Stahl, meant the art of resolving mixed, compound, or aggregate bodies into their principles; and of composing such bodies from those principles.
In 1837, Jean-Baptiste Dumas considered the word "chemistry" to refer to the science concerned with the laws and effects of molecular forces.
This definition further evolved until, in 1947, it came to mean the science of substances: their structure, their properties, and the reactions that change them into other substances—a characterization accepted by Linus Pauling.
More recently, in 1998, Professor Raymond Chang broadened the definition of "chemistry" to mean the study of matter and the changes it undergoes.
Early civilizations, such as the Egyptians, Babylonians, and Indians, amassed practical knowledge concerning the arts of metallurgy, pottery and dyes, but did not develop a systematic theory.
A basic chemical hypothesis first emerged in Classical Greece with the theory of four elements as propounded definitively by Aristotle stating that fire, air, earth and water were the fundamental elements from which everything is formed as a combination.
Greek atomism dates back to 440 BC, arising in works by philosophers such as Democritus and Epicurus.
In 50 BCE, the Roman philosopher Lucretius expanded upon the theory in his poem De rerum natura (On The Nature of Things).
Unlike modern concepts of science, Greek atomism was purely philosophical in nature, with little concern for empirical observations and no concern for chemical experiments.
An early form of the idea of conservation of mass is the notion that "Nothing comes from nothing" in Ancient Greek philosophy, which can be found in Empedocles (approx.
In the Hellenistic world the art of alchemy first proliferated, mingling magic and occultism into the study of natural substances with the ultimate goal of transmuting elements into gold and discovering the elixir of eternal life.
Work, particularly the development of distillation, continued in the early Byzantine period with the most famous practitioner being the 4th century Greek-Egyptian Zosimos of Panopolis.
Alchemy continued to be developed and practised throughout the Arab world after the Muslim conquests, and from there, and from the Byzantine remnants, diffused into medieval and Renaissance Europe through Latin translations.
The Arabic works attributed to Jabir ibn Hayyan introduced a systematic classification of chemical substances, and provided instructions for deriving an inorganic compound (sal ammoniac or ammonium chloride) from organic substances (such as plants, blood, and hair) by chemical means.
Some Arabic Jabirian works (e.
Later influential Muslim philosophers, such as Abū al-Rayhān al-Bīrūnī and Avicenna disputed the theories of alchemy, particularly the theory of the transmutation of metals.
Improvements of the refining of ores and their extractions to smelt metals was widely used source of information for early chemists in the 16th century, among them Georg Agricola (1494–1555), who published his major work De re metallica in 1556.
His work, describing highly developed and complex processes of mining metal ores and metal extraction, were the pinnacle of metallurgy during that time.
His approach removed all mysticism associated with the subject, creating the practical base upon which others could and would build.
The work describes the many kinds of furnaces used to smelt ore, and stimulated interest in minerals and their composition.
Agricola has been described as the "father of metallurgy" and the founder of geology as a scientific discipline.
Under the influence of the Scientific Revolution and its new empirical methods propounded by Sir Francis Bacon and others, a group of chemists at Oxford, Robert Boyle, Robert Hooke and John Mayow began to reshape the old alchemical traditions into a scientific discipline.
Boyle in particular questioned some commonly held chemical theories and argued for chemical practitioners to be more "philosophical" and less commercially focused in The Sceptical Chemyst.
He formulated Boyle's law, rejected the classical "four elements" and proposed a mechanistic alternative of atoms and chemical reactions that could be subject to rigorous experiment.
In the following decades, many important discoveries were made, such as the nature of 'air' which was discovered to be composed of many different gases.
The Scottish chemist Joseph Black and the Flemish Jan Baptist van Helmont discovered carbon dioxide, or what Black called 'fixed air' in 1754; Henry Cavendish discovered hydrogen and elucidated its properties and Joseph Priestley and, independently, Carl Wilhelm Scheele isolated pure oxygen.
The theory of phlogiston (a substance at the root of all combustion) was propounded by the German Georg Ernst Stahl in the early 18th century and was only overturned by the end of the century by the French chemist Antoine Lavoisier, the chemical analogue of Newton in physics.
Lavoisier did more than any other to establish the new science on proper theoretical footing, by elucidating the principle of conservation of mass and developing a new system of chemical nomenclature used to this day.
English scientist John Dalton proposed the modern theory of atoms; that all substances are composed of indivisible 'atoms' of matter and that different atoms have varying atomic weights.
The development of the electrochemical theory of chemical combinations occurred in the early 19th century as the result of the work of two scientists in particular, Jöns Jacob Berzelius and Humphry Davy, made possible by the prior invention of the voltaic pile by Alessandro Volta.
Davy discovered nine new elements including the alkali metals by extracting them from their oxides with electric current.
British William Prout first proposed ordering all the elements by their atomic weight as all atoms had a weight that was an exact multiple of the atomic weight of hydrogen.
Newlands devised an early table of elements, which was then developed into the modern periodic table of elements in the 1860s by Dmitri Mendeleev and independently by several other scientists including Julius Lothar Meyer.
The inert gases, later called the noble gases were discovered by William Ramsay in collaboration with Lord Rayleigh at the end of the century, thereby filling in the basic structure of the table.
Organic chemistry was developed by Justus von Liebig and others, following Friedrich Wöhler's synthesis of urea.
Other crucial 19th century advances were; an understanding of valence bonding (Edward Frankland in 1852) and the application of thermodynamics to chemistry (J.
Gibbs and Svante Arrhenius in the 1870s).
At the turn of the twentieth century the theoretical underpinnings of chemistry were finally understood due to a series of remarkable discoveries that succeeded in probing and discovering the very nature of the internal structure of atoms.
Thomson of the University of Cambridge discovered the electron and soon after the French scientist Becquerel as well as the couple Pierre and Marie Curie investigated the phenomenon of radioactivity.
In a series of pioneering scattering experiments Ernest Rutherford at the University of Manchester discovered the internal structure of the atom and the existence of the proton, classified and explained the different types of radioactivity and successfully transmuted the first element by bombarding nitrogen with alpha particles.
His work on atomic structure was improved on by his students, the Danish physicist Niels Bohr, the Englishman Henry Moseley and the German Otto Hahn, who went on to father the emerging nuclear chemistry and discovered nuclear fission.
The electronic theory of chemical bonds and molecular orbitals was developed by the American scientists Linus Pauling and Gilbert N.
The year 2011 was declared by the United Nations as the International Year of Chemistry.
As one of the United Nations' many International Year designations, it was an initiative to broaden outreach and public understanding in chemistry.
The year was chosen as the 100th anniversary of Marie Curie's receipt of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
Several years later, in 2019, the UN declared the International Year of the Periodic Table.
In the practice of chemistry, pure chemistry is the study of the fundamental principles of chemistry, while applied chemistry applies that knowledge to develop technology and solve real-world problems.
Chemistry is typically divided into several major sub-disciplines.
There are also several main cross-disciplinary and more specialized fields of chemistry.
Analytical chemistry is the analysis of material samples to gain an understanding of their chemical composition and structure.
Analytical chemistry incorporates standardized experimental methods in chemistry.
These methods may be used in all subdisciplines of chemistry, excluding purely theoretical chemistry.
Biochemistry is the study of the chemicals, chemical reactions and interactions that occur in living organisms.
Biochemistry is highly interdisciplinary, covering medicinal chemistry, neurochemistry, molecular biology, forensics, plant science and genetics.
Neurochemistry is the study of neurochemicals; including transmitters, peptides, proteins, lipids, sugars, and nucleic acids; their interactions, and the roles they play in forming, maintaining, and modifying the nervous system.
Inorganic chemistry traditionally was the study of metals and minerals, but is mainly concerned with the structure and behavior of compounds derived from metals and main group elements.
The distinction between organic and inorganic disciplines is not absolute and there is much overlap, most importantly in the sub-discipline of organometallic chemistry.
Materials chemistry is the preparation, characterization, and understanding of solid state components or devices with a useful current or future function.
The field is a new breadth of study in graduate programs, and it integrates elements from all classical areas of chemistry like organic chemistry, inorganic chemistry, and crystallography with a focus on fundamental issues that are unique to materials.
Primary systems of study include the chemistry of condensed phases (solids, liquids, polymers) and interfaces between different phases.
Organic chemistry is the study of the structure, properties, composition, mechanisms, and reactions of organic compounds.
An organic compound is defined as any compound based on a carbon skeleton.
Organic compounds can be classified, organized and understood in reactions by their functional groups, unit atoms or molecules that show characteristic chemical properties in a compound.
Physical chemistry is the study of the physical and fundamental basis of chemical systems and processes.
In particular, the energetics and dynamics of such systems and processes are of interest to physical chemists.
Important areas of study include chemical thermodynamics, chemical kinetics, electrochemistry, statistical mechanics, spectroscopy, and more recently, astrochemistry.
Physical chemistry has large overlap with molecular physics.
Physical chemistry involves the use of infinitesimal calculus in deriving equations.
It is usually associated with quantum chemistry and theoretical chemistry.
Physical chemistry is a distinct discipline from chemical physics, but again, there is very strong overlap.
Theoretical chemistry is the study of chemistry via fundamental theoretical reasoning (usually within mathematics or physics).
In particular the application of quantum mechanics to chemistry is called quantum chemistry.
Since the end of the Second World War, the development of computers has allowed a systematic development of computational chemistry, which is the art of developing and applying computer programs for solving chemical problems.
Theoretical chemistry has large overlap with (theoretical and experimental) condensed matter physics and molecular physics.
Other subdivisions include electrochemistry, femtochemistry, flavor chemistry, flow chemistry, immunohistochemistry, hydrogenation chemistry, mathematical chemistry, molecular mechanics, natural product chemistry, organometallic chemistry, petrochemistry, photochemistry, physical organic chemistry, polymer chemistry, radiochemistry, sonochemistry, supramolecular chemistry, synthetic chemistry, and many others.
Interdisciplinary fields include agrochemistry, astrochemistry (and cosmochemistry), atmospheric chemistry, chemical engineering, chemical biology, chemo-informatics, environmental chemistry, geochemistry, green chemistry, immunochemistry, marine chemistry, materials science, mechanochemistry, medicinal chemistry, molecular biology, nanotechnology, oenology, pharmacology, phytochemistry, solid-state chemistry, surface science, thermochemistry, and many others.
The chemical industry represents an important economic activity worldwide.
The global top 50 chemical producers in 2013 had sales of US$980.
Archived from the original on 10 March 2008.
Encyclopædia Britannica.
Shriver and Atkins Inorganic Chemistry (4th ed.
Boston, Massachusetts: James M.
Clayden, Jonathan; Greeves, Nick; Warren, Stuart; Wothers, Peter (2001).
Organic Chemistry (1st ed.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-850346-0.
Tucker, William (2024).
Chemistry: Energy, Matter, and Change.
General Chemistry principles, patterns and applications.
Biology is the scientific study of life and living organisms.
It is a broad natural science that encompasses a wide range of fields and unifying principles that explain the structure, function, growth, origin, evolution, and distribution of life.
Central to biology are five fundamental themes: the cell as the basic unit of life, genes and heredity as the basis of inheritance, evolution as the driver of biological diversity, energy transformation for sustaining life processes, and homeostasis, the maintenance of internal stability.
Biology examines life across multiple levels of organization, from molecules and cells to organisms, population, and ecosystems.
Subdisciplines include molecular biology, physiology, ecology, evolutionary biology, developmental biology, and systematics, among others.
Each of these fields applies a range of methods to investigate biological phenomena, including observation, experimentation, and mathematical modeling.
Modern biology is grounded in the theory of evolution by natural selection, first articulated by Charles Darwin, and in the molecular understanding of genes encoded in DNA.
The discovery of the structure of DNA and advances in molecular genetics have transformed many areas of biology, leading to applications in medicine, agriculture, biotechnology, and environmental science.
Biologists classify organisms—from single-celled archaea and bacteria to multicellular plants, fungi, and animals—based on shared characteristics and evolutionary relationships, using taxonomic and phylogenetics.
From Greek βίος (bíos) 'life', (from Proto-Indo-European root *gwei-, to live) and λογία (logia) 'study of'.
The compound appears in the title of Volume 3 of Michael Christoph Hanow's Philosophiae naturalis sive physicae dogmaticae: Geologia, biologia, phytologia generalis et dendrologia, published in 1766.
The term biology in its modern sense appears to have been introduced independently by Thomas Beddoes (in 1799), Karl Friedrich Burdach (in 1800), Gottfried Reinhold Treviranus (Biologie oder Philosophie der lebenden Natur, 1802) and Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (Hydrogéologie, 1802).
The earliest of roots of science, which included medicine, can be traced to ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia in around 3000 to 1200 BCE.
Their contributions shaped ancient Greek natural philosophy.
Ancient Greek philosophers such as Aristotle (384–322 BCE) contributed extensively to the development of biological knowledge.
He explored biological causation and the diversity of life.
His successor, Theophrastus, began the scientific study of plants.
Scholars of the medieval Islamic world who wrote on biology included al-Jahiz (781–869), Al-Dīnawarī (828–896), who wrote on botany.
Biology began to develop quickly with Anton van Leeuwenhoek's dramatic improvement of the microscope.
It was then that scholars discovered spermatozoa, bacteria, infusoria and the diversity of microscopic life.
Investigations by Jan Swammerdam led to new interest in entomology and helped to develop techniques of microscopic dissection and staining.
Advances in microscopy had a profound impact on biological thinking.
In the early 19th century, biologists pointed to the central importance of the cell.
In 1838, Schleiden and Schwann began promoting the now universal ideas that (1) the basic unit of organisms is the cell and (2) that individual cells have all the characteristics of life, although they opposed the idea that (3) all cells come from the division of other cells, continuing to support spontaneous generation.
However, Robert Remak and Rudolf Virchow were able to reify the third tenet, and by the 1860s most biologists accepted all three tenets which consolidated into cell theory.
Meanwhile, taxonomy and classification became the focus of natural historians.
Carl Linnaeus published a basic taxonomy for the natural world in 1735, and in the 1750s introduced scientific names for all his species.
Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon, treated species as artificial categories and living forms as malleable—even suggesting the possibility of common descent.
Serious evolutionary thinking originated with the works of Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, who presented a coherent theory of evolution.
The British naturalist Charles Darwin, combining the biogeographical approach of Humboldt, the uniformitarian geology of Lyell, Malthus's writings on population growth, and his own morphological expertise and extensive natural observations, forged a more successful evolutionary theory based on natural selection; similar reasoning and evidence led Alfred Russel Wallace to independently reach the same conclusions.
The basis for modern genetics began with the work of Gregor Mendel in 1865.
This outlined the principles of biological inheritance.
However, the significance of his work was not realized until the early 20th century when evolution became a unified theory as the modern synthesis reconciled Darwinian evolution with classical genetics.
In the 1940s and early 1950s, a series of experiments by Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase pointed to DNA as the component of chromosomes that held the trait-carrying units that had become known as genes.
A focus on new kinds of model organisms such as viruses and bacteria, along with the discovery of the double-helical structure of DNA by James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953, marked the transition to the era of molecular genetics.
From the 1950s onwards, biology has been vastly extended in the molecular domain.
The genetic code was cracked by Har Gobind Khorana, Robert W.
Holley and Marshall Warren Nirenberg after DNA was understood to contain codons.
The Human Genome Project was launched in 1990 to map the human genome.
Biochemistry is the study of chemical processes within and relating to living organisms.
Molecular biology is the branch of biology that seeks to understand the molecular basis of biological activity in and between cells.
It is centered largely on the study of nucleic acids (such as DNA and RNA) and proteins.
It examines the structure, function, and interactions of these macromolecules as they orchestrate processes such as replication, transcription, translation, protein synthesis, and complex biomolecular interactions.
In 1953, the Miller–Urey experiment showed that organic compounds could be synthesized abiotically within a closed system mimicking the conditions of early Earth, thus suggesting that complex organic molecules could have arisen spontaneously in early Earth in the process of abiogenesis.
Cell biology is the branch of biology that studies the structure, function, and behaviour of cells.
Bioenergetics is a field in biochemistry and cell biology that concerns energy flow through living systems.
This is an active area of biological research that includes the study of the transformation of energy in living organisms and the study of thousands of different cellular processes such as cellular respiration and other metabolic and enzymatic processes that enable the use of energy.
Genetics is the scientific study of inheritance.
Classical genetics, specifically, is the study of how genes and traits are passed on from parents to offspring; its principles are called Mendelian inheritance.
A Punnett square can be used to predict the results of a test cross.
The chromosome theory of inheritance, which states that genes are found on chromosomes, was supported by Thomas Morgans's experiments with fruit flies, which established the sex linkage between eye color and sex in these insects.
Evolutionary developmental biology compares the developmental processes of different organisms to infer how developmental processes evolved.
The field grew from 19th-century beginnings, where embryology faced a mystery: zoologists did not know how embryonic development was controlled at the molecular level.
Charles Darwin noted that having similar embryos implied common ancestry, but little progress was made until the 1970s.
Then, recombinant DNA technology at last brought embryology together with molecular genetics.
A key early discovery was that of homeotic genes that regulate development in a wide range of eukaryotes.
The field explores deep homology, the finding that dissimilar organs such as the eyes of insects, vertebrates and cephalopod molluscs, long thought to have evolved separately, are controlled by similar genes from the evo-devo gene toolkit.
Evolutionary biology is a subfield of biology that analyzes the mechanisms of evolution.
Evolution accounts for the unity and diversity of life on Earth; Theodosius Dobzhansky famously said "nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution".
Population genetics for example studies how genetic variation develops, how it is inherited, and how the evolutionary mechanisms shape a population's genetic composition.
Research in evolutionary biology covers many topics and incorporates ideas from diverse areas, such as molecular genetics and mathematical and theoretical biology.
Some fields of evolutionary research try to explain phenomena that were poorly accounted for in the modern evolutionary synthesis.
These include speciation, the evolution of sexual reproduction, the evolution of cooperation, the evolution of ageing, and evolvability.
Ecology is the study of the distribution and abundance of life, the interaction between organisms and their environment.
Systematics is the study of the diversification of living forms, both past and present, and the relationships among living things through time.
Relationships are visualized as evolutionary trees, studied using phylogenetics, and creating a unified taxonomy of life.
Conservation biology is the study of the conservation of Earth's biodiversity with the aim of protecting species, their habitats, and ecosystems from excessive rates of extinction and the erosion of biotic interactions.
It is concerned with factors that influence the maintenance, loss, and restoration of biodiversity and the science of sustaining evolutionary processes that engender genetic, population, species, and ecosystem diversity.
The concern stems from estimates suggesting that up to 50% of all species on the planet will disappear within the next 50 years, which has contributed to poverty, starvation, and will reset the course of evolution on this planet.
Conservation biologists research the trends of biodiversity loss, species extinctions, and the negative effect these are having on our capabilities to sustain the well-being of human society.
Astronomy is a natural science that studies celestial objects and the phenomena that occur in the cosmos.
It uses mathematics, physics, and chemistry to explain their origin and their overall evolution.
Objects of interest include planets, moons, stars, nebulae, galaxies, meteoroids, asteroids, and comets.
Relevant phenomena include supernova explosions, gamma ray bursts, quasars, blazars, pulsars, and cosmic microwave background radiation.
More generally, astronomy studies everything that originates beyond Earth's atmosphere.
Cosmology is the branch of astronomy that studies the universe as a whole.
Astronomy is one of the oldest natural sciences.
The early civilizations in recorded history made methodical observations of the night sky.
These include the Egyptians, Babylonians, Greeks, Indians, Chinese, Maya, and many ancient indigenous peoples of the Americas.
In the past, astronomy included disciplines as diverse as astrometry, celestial navigation, observational astronomy, and the making of calendars.
Astronomy is one of the few sciences in which amateurs play an active role.
This is especially true for the discovery and observation of transient events.
Amateur astronomers have helped with many important discoveries, such as finding new comets.
Astronomy (from the Greek ἀστρονομία from ἄστρον astron, "star" and -νομία -nomia from νόμος nomos, "law" or "rule") means study of celestial objects.
Astronomy should not be confused with astrology, the belief system which claims that human affairs are correlated with the positions of celestial objects.
The two fields share a common origin but became distinct, astronomy being supported by physics while astrology is not.
In dictionary definitions, "astronomy" is "the study of objects and matter outside the Earth's atmosphere and of their physical and chemical properties", while "astrophysics" is the branch of astronomy dealing with "the behavior, physical properties, and dynamic processes of celestial objects and phenomena".
Sometimes, as in the introduction of the introductory textbook The Physical Universe by Frank Shu, "astronomy" means the qualitative study of the subject, whereas "astrophysics" is the physics-oriented version of the subject.
Some fields, such as astrometry, are in this sense purely astronomy rather than also astrophysics.
Research departments may use "astronomy" and "astrophysics" according to whether the department is historically affiliated with a physics department, and many professional astronomers have physics rather than astronomy degrees.
Thus, in modern use, the two terms are often used interchangeably.
The initial development of astronomy was driven by practical needs like agricultural calendars.
Before recorded history archeological sites such as Stonehenge provide evidence of ancient interest in astronomical observations.
Evidence also comes from artefacts such as the Nebra sky disc inlaid with symbols interpreted as a sun, moon, and stars including a cluster of seven stars.
Megalithic structures located in Nabta Playa, Upper Egypt featured astronomical calendar arrangements in alignment with the heliacal rising of Sirius and supported calibration the yearly calendar for the annual Nile flood.
Civilizations such as Egypt, Mesopotamia, Greece, India, China independently but with cross-cultural influences created astronomical observatories and developed ideas on the nature of the Universe, along with calendars and astronomical instruments.
A key early development was the beginning of mathematical and scientific astronomy among the Babylonians, laying the foundations for astronomical traditions in other civilizations.
The Babylonians discovered that lunar eclipses recurred in the saros cycle of 223 synodic months.
Following the Babylonians, significant advances were made in ancient Greece and the Hellenistic world.
Greek astronomy sought a rational, physical explanation for celestial phenomena.
In the 4th century BC, Heracleides Ponticus was the first to proposed that the Earth rotates on its own axis.
In the 3rd century BC, Aristarchus of Samos estimated the size and distance of the Moon and Sun, and he proposed a model of the Solar System where the Earth and planets rotated around the Sun, now called the heliocentric model.
In the 2nd century BC, Hipparchus calculated the size and distance of the Moon and invented the earliest known astronomical devices such as the astrolabe.
He also observed the small drift in the positions of the equinoxes and solstices with respect to the fixed stars that we now know is caused by precession.
Hipparchus also created a catalog of 1020 stars, and most of the constellations of the northern hemisphere derive from Greek astronomy.
The Antikythera mechanism (c.
Technological artifacts of similar complexity did not reappear until the 14th century, when mechanical astronomical clocks appeared in Europe.
After the classical Greek era, astronomy was dominated by the geocentric model of the Universe, or the Ptolemaic system, named after Claudius Ptolemy.
His 13-volume astronomy work, named the Almagest in its Arabic translation, became the primary reference for over a thousand years.
In this system, the Earth was believed to be the center of the Universe with the Sun, the Moon and the stars rotating around it.
While the system would eventually be discredited, it gave the most accurate predictions for the positions of astronomical bodies available at that time.
With the arrival of Hellenistic astronomy in India through trade and cultural contacts, Indian astronomy entered a new phase during the early centuries CE.
Earlier indigenous traditions, such as those recorded in the Vedāṅga Jyotiṣa, provided calendrical foundations, while Greek astronomical models were later integrated by scholars including Āryabhaṭa, Varāhamihira, and Brahmagupta.
Āryabhaṭa notably improved methods for calculating planetary motions and eclipses.
In the later medieval period, the Kerala school contributed to astronomy through refined observational practices and more accurate planetary and eclipse calculations.
Astronomy flourished in the medieval Islamic world.
Astronomical observatories were established there by the early 9th century.
In 964, the Andromeda Galaxy, the largest galaxy in the Local Group, was described by the Persian Muslim astronomer Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi in his Book of Fixed Stars.
The SN 1006 supernova, the brightest apparent magnitude stellar event in the last 1000 years, was observed by the Egyptian Arabic astronomer Ali ibn Ridwan and Chinese astronomers in 1006.
Iranian scholar Al-Biruni observed that, contrary to Ptolemy, the Sun's apogee (highest point in the heavens) was mobile, not fixed.
Arabic astronomers introduced many Arabic names now used for individual stars.
The ruins at Great Zimbabwe and Timbuktu may have housed astronomical observatories.
In Post-classical West Africa, astronomers studied the movement of stars and relation to seasons, crafting charts of the heavens and diagrams of orbits of the other planets based on complex mathematical calculations.
Songhai historian Mahmud Kati documented a meteor shower in 1583.
In medieval Europe, Richard of Wallingford (1292–1336) invented the first astronomical clock, the Rectangulus which allowed for the measurement of angles between planets and other astronomical bodies, as well as an equatorium called the Albion which could be used for astronomical calculations such as lunar, solar and planetary longitudes.
Nicole Oresme (1320–1382) discussed evidence for the rotation of the Earth.
Jean Buridan (1300–1361) developed the theory of impetus, describing motions including of the celestial bodies.
For over six centuries (from the recovery of ancient learning during the late Middle Ages into the Enlightenment), the Roman Catholic Church gave more financial and social support to the study of astronomy than probably all other institutions.
Among the Church's motives was finding the date for Easter.
During the Renaissance, Nicolaus Copernicus proposed a heliocentric model of the solar system.
While his model maintained circular orbits, it was sufficient to calculate the size of planetary orbits and their period.
The appealing simplicity of Copernican astronomy led to its adoption among astronomers even before it was confirmed by Galileo's telescopic observations in the 1600s.
Sometime around 1608 the telescope was invented and by 1610, Galileo Galilei observed phases on the planet Venus similar to those of the Moon, supporting the heliocentric model.
Around the same time the heliocentric model was organized quantitatively by Johannes Kepler.
Analyzing two decades of careful observations by Tycho Brahe, Kepler devised a system that described the details of the motion of the planets around the Sun.
While Kepler discarded the uniform circular motion of Copernicus in favor of elliptical motion, he did not succeed in formulating a theory behind the laws he wrote down.
It was Isaac Newton, with his invention of celestial dynamics and his law of gravitation, who finally explained the motions of the planets.
Newton also developed the reflecting telescope.
Newton, in collaboration with Richard Bentley proposed that stars are like the Sun only much further away.
The new telescopes also altered ideas about stars.
By 1610 Galileo discovered that the band of light crossing the sky at night that we call the Milky Way was composed of numerous stars.
In 1668 James Gregory compared the luminosity of Jupiter to Sirius to estimate its distance at over 83,000 AU.
The English astronomer John Flamsteed, Britain's first Astronomer Royal, catalogued over 3000 stars but the data were published against his wishes in 1712.
The astronomer William Herschel made a detailed catalog of nebulosity and clusters, and in 1781 discovered the planet Uranus, the first new planet found.
Friedrich Bessel developed the technique of stellar parallax in 1838 but it was so difficult to apply that only about 100 stars were measured by 1900.
During the 18–19th centuries, the study of the three-body problem by Leonhard Euler, Alexis Claude Clairaut, and Jean le Rond d'Alembert led to more accurate predictions about the motions of the Moon and planets.
This work was further refined by Joseph-Louis Lagrange and Pierre Simon Laplace, allowing the masses of the planets and moons to be estimated from their perturbations.
Significant advances in astronomy came about with the introduction of new technology, including the spectroscope and astrophotography.
In 1814–15, Joseph von Fraunhofer discovered some 574 dark lines in the spectrum of the sun and of other stars.
In 1859, Gustav Kirchhoff ascribed these lines to the presence of different elements.
In the late 1700s William Herschel mapped the distribution of stars in different directions from Earth, concluding that the universe consisted of the Sun near the center of disk of stars, the Milky Way.
After John Michell demonstrated that stars differ in intrinsic luminosity and after Herschel's own observations with more powerful telescopes that additional stars appeared in all directions, astronomers began to consider that some of the fuzzy spiral nebulae were distant island Universes.
The existence of galaxies, including the Earth's galaxy, the Milky Way, as a group of stars was only demonstrated in the 20th century.
In 1912, Henrietta Leavitt discovered Cepheid variable stars with well-defined, periodic luminosity changes which can be used to fix the star's true luminosity which then becomes an accurate tool for distance estimates.
Using Cepheid variable stars, Harlow Shapley constructed the first accurate map of the Milky Way.
Using the Hooker Telescope, Edwin Hubble identified Cepheid variables in several spiral nebulae and in 1922–1923 proved conclusively that Andromeda Nebula and Triangulum among others, were entire galaxies outside our own, thus proving that the universe consists of a multitude of galaxies.
Albert Einstein's 1917 publication of general relativity began the modern era of theoretical models of the universe as a whole.
In 1922, Alexander Friedman published simplified models for the universe showing static, expanding and contracting solutions.
In 1929 Hubble published observations that the galaxies are all moving away from Earth with a velocity proportional to distance, a relation now known as Hubble's law.
This relation is expected if the universe is expanding.
The consequence that the universe was once very dense and hot, a Big Bang concept expounded by Georges Lemaître in 1927, was discussed but no experimental evidence was available to support it.
From the 1940s on, nuclear reaction rates under high density conditions were studied leading to the development of a successful model of big bang nucleosynthesis in the late 1940s and early 1950s.
Then in 1965 cosmic microwave background radiation was discovered, cementing the evidence for the Big Bang.
Astrophysics predicted the existence of objects such as black holes and neutron stars.
These have been used to explain phenomena such as quasars and pulsars.
Space telescopes have enabled measurements in parts of the electromagnetic spectrum normally blocked or blurred by the atmosphere.
The LIGO project detected evidence of gravitational waves in 2015.
Observational astronomy relies on many different wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation and the forms of astronomy are categorized according to the corresponding region of the electromagnetic spectrum on which the observations are made.
Specific information on these subfields is given below.
Radio astronomy uses radiation with long wavelengths, mainly between 1 millimeter and 15 meters (frequencies from 20 MHz to 300 GHz), far outside the visible range.
Hydrogen, otherwise an invisible gas, produces a spectral line at 21 cm (1420 MHz) which is observable at radio wavelengths.
Objects observable at radio wavelengths include interstellar gas, pulsars, fast radio bursts, supernovae, and active galactic nuclei.
Infrared astronomy detects infrared radiation with wavelengths longer than red visible light, outside the range of our vision.
The infrared spectrum is useful for studying objects that are too cold to radiate visible light, such as planets, circumstellar disks or nebulae whose light is blocked by dust.
The longer wavelengths of infrared can penetrate clouds of dust that block visible light, allowing the observation of young stars embedded in molecular clouds and the cores of galaxies.
Observations from the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) have been particularly effective at unveiling numerous galactic protostars and their host star clusters.
With the exception of infrared wavelengths close to visible light, such radiation is heavily absorbed by the atmosphere, or masked, as the atmosphere itself produces significant infrared emission.
Consequently, infrared observatories have to be located in high, dry places on Earth or in space.
Some molecules radiate strongly in the infrared.
This allows the study of the chemistry of space.
The James Webb Space Telescope senses infrared radiation to detect very distant galaxies.
Visible light from these galaxies was emitted billions of years ago and the expansion of the universe shifted the light in to the infrared range.
By studying these distant galaxies astronomers hope to learn about the formation of the first galaxies.
Historically, optical astronomy, which has been also called visible light astronomy, is the oldest form of astronomy.
Images of observations were originally drawn by hand.
In the late 19th century and most of the 20th century, images were made using photographic equipment.
Modern images are made using digital detectors, particularly using charge-coupled devices (CCDs) and recorded on modern medium.
Although visible light itself extends from approximately 380 to 700 nm that same equipment can be used to observe some near-ultraviolet and near-infrared radiation.
Ultraviolet astronomy employs ultraviolet wavelengths which are absorbed by the Earth's atmosphere, requiring observations from the upper atmosphere or from space.
Ultraviolet astronomy is best suited to the study of thermal radiation and spectral emission lines from hot blue OB stars that are very bright at these wavelengths.
X-ray astronomy uses X-radiation, produced by extremely hot and high-energy processes.
Since X-rays are absorbed by the Earth's atmosphere, observations must be performed at high altitude, such as from balloons, rockets, or specialized satellites.
X-ray sources include X-ray binaries, supernova remnants, clusters of galaxies, and active galactic nuclei.
Since the Sun's surface is relatively cool, X-ray images of the Sun and other stars give valuable information on the hot solar corona.
Gamma ray astronomy observes astronomical objects at the shortest wavelengths (highest energy) of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Gamma rays may be observed directly by satellites such as the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, or by specialized telescopes called atmospheric Cherenkov telescopes.
Cherenkov telescopes do not detect the gamma rays directly but instead detect the flashes of visible light produced when gamma rays are absorbed by the Earth's atmosphere.
Gamma-ray astronomy provides information on the origin of cosmic rays, possible annihilation events for dark matter, relativistic particles outflows from active galactic nuclei (AGN), and, using AGN as distant sources, properties of intergalactic space.
Gamma-ray bursts, which radiate transiently, are extremely energetic events, and are the brightest (most luminous) phenomena in the universe.
Some events originating from great distances may be observed from the Earth using systems that do not rely on electromagnetic radiation.
In neutrino astronomy, astronomers use heavily shielded underground facilities such as SAGE, GALLEX, and Kamioka II/III for the detection of neutrinos.
The vast majority of the neutrinos streaming through the Earth originate from the Sun, but 24 neutrinos were also detected from supernova 1987A.
Cosmic rays, which consist of very high energy particles (atomic nuclei) that can decay or be absorbed when they enter the Earth's atmosphere, result in a cascade of secondary particles which can be detected by current observatories.
Gravitational-wave astronomy employs gravitational-wave detectors to collect observational data about distant massive objects.
A few observatories have been constructed, such as the Laser Interferometer Gravitational Observatory LIGO.
LIGO made its first detection on 14 September 2015, observing gravitational waves from a binary black hole.
A second gravitational wave was detected on 26 December 2015 and additional observations should continue but gravitational waves require extremely sensitive instruments.
The combination of observations made using electromagnetic radiation, neutrinos or gravitational waves and other complementary information, is known as multi-messenger astronomy.
One of the oldest fields in astronomy, and in all of science, is the measurement of the positions of celestial objects known as astrometry.
Historically, accurate knowledge of the positions of the Sun, Moon, planets and stars has been essential in celestial navigation (the use of celestial objects to guide navigation) and in the making of calendars.
Careful measurement of the positions of the planets has led to a solid understanding of gravitational perturbations, and an ability to determine past and future positions of the planets with great accuracy, a field known as celestial mechanics.
The measurement of stellar parallax of nearby stars provides a fundamental baseline in the cosmic distance ladder that is used to measure the scale of the Universe.
Parallax measurements of nearby stars provide an absolute baseline for the properties of more distant stars, as their properties can be compared.
Measurements of the radial velocity and proper motion of stars allow astronomers to plot the movement of these systems through the Milky Way galaxy.
Physical cosmology, the study of large-scale structure of the Universe, seeks to understand the formation and evolution of the cosmos.
Fundamental to modern cosmology is the well-accepted theory of the Big Bang, the concept that the universe begin extremely dense and hot, then expanded over the course of 13.
The concept of the Big Bang became widely accepted after the discovery of the microwave background radiation in 1965.
Dark matter and dark energy are now thought form 96% of the mass of the Universe.
For this reason, much effort is expended in trying to understand the physics of these components.
The study of objects outside our galaxy is concerned with the formation and evolution of galaxies, their morphology (description) and classification, the observation of active galaxies, and at a larger scale, the groups and clusters of galaxies.
These assist the understanding of the large-scale structure of the cosmos.
Galactic astronomy studies galaxies including the Milky Way, a barred spiral galaxy that is a prominent member of the Local Group of galaxies and contains the Solar System.
It is a rotating mass of gas, dust, stars and other objects, held together by mutual gravitational attraction.
As the Earth is within the dusty outer arms, large portions of the Milky Way are obscured from view.
Kinematic studies of matter in the Milky Way and other galaxies show there is more mass than can be accounted for by visible matter.
A dark matter halo appears to dominate the mass, although the nature of this dark matter remains undetermined.
The study of stars and stellar evolution is fundamental to our understanding of the Universe.
The astrophysics of stars has been determined through observation and theoretical understanding; and from computer simulations of the interior.
Aspects studied include star formation in giant molecular clouds; the formation of protostars; and the transition to nuclear fusion and main-sequence stars, carrying out nucleosynthesis.
Further processes studied include stellar evolution, ending either with supernovae or white dwarfs.
The ejection of the outer layers forms a planetary nebula.
The remnant of a supernova is a dense neutron star, or, if the stellar mass was at least three times that of the Sun, a black hole.
Solar astronomy is the study of the Sun, a typical main-sequence dwarf star of stellar class G2 V, and about 4.
Processes studied by the science include the sunspot cycle, the sun's changes in luminosity, both steady and periodic, and the behavior of the sun's various layers, namely its core with its nuclear fusion, the radiation zone, the convection zone, the photosphere, the chromosphere, and the corona.
Planetary science is the study of the assemblage of planets, moons, dwarf planets, comets, asteroids, and other bodies orbiting the Sun, as well as exoplanets orbiting distant stars.
The Solar System has been relatively well-studied, initially through telescopes and then later by spacecraft.
Processes studied include planetary differentiation; the generation of, and effects created by, a planetary magnetic field; and the creation of heat within a planet, such as by collisions, radioactive decay, and tidal heating.
In turn, that heat can drive geologic processes such as volcanism, tectonics, and surface erosion, studied by branches of geology.
Astrochemistry is an overlap of astronomy and chemistry.
It studies the abundance and reactions of molecules in the Universe, and their interaction with radiation.
The word "astrochemistry" may be applied to both the Solar System and the interstellar medium.
Studies in this field contribute for example to the understanding of the formation of the Solar System.
Astrobiology (or exobiology) studies the origin of life and its development other than on earth.
It considers whether extraterrestrial life exists, and how humans can detect it if it does.
It makes use of astronomy, biochemistry, geology, microbiology, physics, and planetary science to investigate the possibility of life on other worlds and help recognize biospheres that might be different from that on Earth.
The origin and early evolution of life is an inseparable part of the discipline of astrobiology.
That encompasses research on the origin of planetary systems, origins of organic compounds in space, rock-water-carbon interactions, abiogenesis on Earth, planetary habitability, research on biosignatures for life detection, and studies on the potential for life to adapt to challenges on Earth and in outer space.
Astronomy and astrophysics have developed interdisciplinary links with other major scientific fields.
Archaeoastronomy is the study of ancient or traditional astronomies in their cultural context, using archaeological and anthropological evidence.
Astrostatistics is the application of statistics to the analysis of large quantities of observational astrophysical data.
As "forensic astronomy", finally, methods from astronomy have been used to solve problems of art history and occasionally of law.
Astronomy is one of the sciences to which amateurs can contribute the most.
Collectively, amateur astronomers observe celestial objects and phenomena, sometimes with consumer-level equipment or equipment that they build themselves.
Common targets include the Sun, the Moon, planets, stars, comets, meteor showers, and deep-sky objects such as star clusters, galaxies, and nebulae.
Astronomy clubs throughout the world have programs to help their members set up and run observational programs such as to observe all the objects in the Messier (110 objects) or Herschel 400 catalogues.
Most amateurs work at visible wavelengths, but some have experimented with wavelengths outside the visible spectrum.
The pioneer of amateur radio astronomy, Karl Jansky, discovered a radio source at the centre of the Milky Way.
Some amateur astronomers use homemade telescopes or radio telescopes originally built for astronomy research (e.
Amateurs can make occultation measurements to refine the orbits of minor planets.
They can discover comets, and perform regular observations of variable stars.
Improvements in digital technology have allowed amateurs to make advances in astrophotography.
In the 21st century, there remain important unanswered questions in astronomy.
Some are cosmic in scope: for example, what are the dark matter and dark energy that dominate the evolution and fate of the cosmos?
What will be the ultimate fate of the universe?
Why is the abundance of lithium in the cosmos four times lower than predicted by the standard Big Bang model?
Others pertain to more specific classes of phenomena.
For example, is the Solar System normal or atypical?
What is the origin of the stellar mass spectrum, i.
Likewise, questions remain about the formation of the first galaxies, the origin of supermassive black holes, the source of ultra-high-energy cosmic rays, and whether there is other life in the Universe, especially other intelligent life.
Forbes, George (1909).
History of Astronomy.
London: Plain Label Books.
ISBN 978-1-60303-159-2.
Archived from the original on 28 August 2018.
Retrieved 7 April 2019.
ISBN 978-1-56881-012-6.
The New Cosmos: An Introduction to Astronomy and Astrophysics.
ISBN 978-3-540-67877-9.
Geology is a branch of natural science concerned with the Earth and other astronomical bodies, the rocks of which they are composed, and the processes by which they change over time.
The name comes from Ancient Greek γῆ (gê) 'earth' and λoγία (-logía) 'study of, discourse'.
Modern geology significantly overlaps all other Earth sciences, including hydrology.
It is integrated with Earth system science and planetary science.
Geology describes the structure of the Earth on and beneath its surface and the processes that have shaped that structure.
Geologists study the mineralogical composition of rocks in order to get insight into their history of formation.
Geology determines the relative ages of rocks found at a given location; geochemistry (a branch of geology) determines their absolute ages.
By combining various petrological, crystallographic, and paleontological tools, geologists are able to chronicle the geological history of the Earth as a whole.
One aspect is to demonstrate the age of the Earth.
Geology provides evidence for plate tectonics, the evolutionary history of life, and the Earth's past climates.
Geologists broadly study the properties and processes of Earth and other terrestrial planets.
Geologists use a wide variety of methods to understand the Earth's structure and evolution, including fieldwork, rock description, geophysical techniques, chemical analysis, physical experiments, and numerical modelling.
In practical terms, geology is important for mineral and hydrocarbon exploration and exploitation, evaluating water resources, understanding natural hazards, remediating environmental problems, and providing insights into past climate change.
Geology is a major academic discipline, and it is central to geological engineering and plays an important role in geotechnical engineering.
The majority of geological data comes from research on solid Earth materials.
Meteorites and other extraterrestrial natural materials are also studied by geological methods.
Minerals are naturally occurring elements and compounds with a definite homogeneous chemical composition and an ordered atomic arrangement.
Amorphous substances that resemble a mineral are sometimes referred to as mineraloids, although there are exceptions such as georgeite and autunite.
Some amorphous substances formed by geological processes are considered minerals if the original substance was a mineral before metamictisation.
Each mineral has distinct physical properties, and there are many tests to determine each of them.
Minerals are often identified through these tests.
Color: Minerals are grouped by their color.
Mostly diagnostic but impurities can change a mineral's color.
Streak: Performed by scratching the sample on a porcelain plate.
The color of the streak can help identify the mineral.
Hardness: The resistance of a mineral to scratching or indentation.
Breakage pattern: A mineral can either show fracture or cleavage, the former being breakage of uneven surfaces, and the latter a breakage along closely spaced parallel planes.
Luster: Quality of light reflected from the surface of a mineral.
Examples are metallic, pearly, waxy, dull.
Specific gravity: the weight of a specific volume of a mineral.
Effervescence: Involves dripping hydrochloric acid on the mineral to test for fizzing.
Magnetism: Involves using a magnet to test for magnetism.
Taste: Minerals can have a distinctive taste such as halite (which tastes like table salt).
A rock is any naturally occurring solid mass or aggregate of minerals or mineraloids.
Most research in geology is associated with the study of rocks, as they provide the primary record of the majority of the geological history of the Earth.
There are three major types of rock: igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic.
When a rock solidifies or crystallizes from melt (magma or lava), it is an igneous rock.
The active flow of molten rock is closely studied in volcanology, and igneous petrology aims to determine the history of igneous rocks from their original molten source to their final crystallization.
Rocks can be weathered and eroded, then redeposited and lithified into a sedimentary rock.
Sedimentary rocks are mainly divided into four categories: sandstone, shale, carbonate, and evaporite.
This group of classifications focuses partly on the size of sedimentary particles (sandstone and shale), and partly on mineralogy and formation processes (carbonation and evaporation).
Igneous and sedimentary rocks can then be turned into metamorphic rocks by heat and pressure that change its mineral content, resulting in a characteristic fabric.
All three types may melt again, and when this happens, new magma is formed, from which an igneous rock may once again solidify.
Organic matter, such as coal, bitumen, oil, and natural gas, is linked mainly to organic-rich sedimentary rocks.
To study all three types of rock, geologists evaluate the minerals of which they are composed and their other physical properties, such as texture and fabric.
Geologists study unlithified materials (referred to as superficial deposits) that lie above the bedrock.
This study is often known as Quaternary geology, after the Quaternary period of geologic history, which is the most recent period of geologic time.
In the 1960s, it was discovered that the Earth's lithosphere, which includes the crust and rigid uppermost portion of the upper mantle, is separated into tectonic plates that move across the plastically deforming, solid, upper mantle, which is called the asthenosphere.
This theory is supported by several types of observations, including seafloor spreading and the global distribution of mountain terrain and seismicity.
There is an intimate coupling between the movement of the plates on the surface and the convection of the mantle (that is, the heat transfer caused by the slow movement of ductile mantle rock).
Thus, oceanic parts of plates and the adjoining mantle convection currents always move in the same direction – because the oceanic lithosphere is actually the rigid upper thermal boundary layer of the convecting mantle.
This coupling between rigid plates moving on the surface of the Earth and the convecting mantle is called plate tectonics.
The development of plate tectonics has provided a physical basis for many observations of the solid Earth.
Mid-ocean ridges, high regions on the seafloor where hydrothermal vents and volcanoes exist, are seen as divergent boundaries, where two plates move apart.
Arcs of volcanoes and earthquakes are theorized as convergent boundaries, where one plate subducts, or moves, under another.
Transform boundaries, such as the San Andreas Fault system, are where plates slide horizontally past each other.
Plate tectonics has provided a mechanism for Alfred Wegener's theory of continental drift, in which the continents move across the surface of the Earth over geological time.
They provided a driving force for crustal deformation, and a new setting for the observations of structural geology.
The power of the theory of plate tectonics lies in its ability to combine all of these observations into a single theory of how the lithosphere moves over the convecting mantle, forming a "grand unifying theory of geology".
Advances in seismology, computer modeling, and mineralogy and crystallography at high temperatures and pressures give insights into the internal composition and structure of the Earth.
Seismologists can use the arrival times of seismic waves to image the interior of the Earth.
Early advances in this field showed the existence of a liquid outer core (where shear waves were not able to propagate) and a dense solid inner core.
These advances led to the development of a layered model of the Earth, with a lithosphere (including crust) on top, the mantle below (separated within itself by seismic discontinuities at 410 and 660 kilometers), and the outer core and inner core below that.
Starting in the 1970s, seismologists have been able to use new techniques such as seismic full-waveform inversion to create detailed images of wave speeds inside the earth in the same way a doctor images a body in a CT scan.
These images have led to a much more detailed view of the interior of the Earth, and have replaced the simplified layered model with a much more dynamic model.
Mineralogists have been able to use the pressure and temperature data from the seismic and modeling studies alongside knowledge of the elemental composition of the Earth to reproduce these conditions in experimental settings and measure changes within the crystal structure.
These studies explain the chemical changes associated with the major seismic discontinuities in the mantle and show the crystallographic structures expected in the inner core of the Earth.
The geological time scale encompasses the history of the Earth.
It is bracketed at the earliest by the dates of the first Solar System material at 4.
At the later end of the scale, it is marked by the present day (in the Holocene epoch).
The following five timelines show the geologic time scale to scale.
The first shows the entire time from the formation of Earth to the present, but this gives little space for the most recent eon.
The second timeline shows an expanded view of the most recent eon.
In a similar way, the most recent era is expanded in the third timeline, the most recent period is expanded in the fourth timeline, and the most recent epoch is expanded in the fifth timeline.
The epochs of lunar history are based on the chronology of impact events, and they are named after defining major impacts.
Hence, the Imbrian is named after the formation of the Mare Imbrium basin.
The ages of older lunar basins can be dated based on the strength of their intrinsic magnetic field, since the early Moon had a magnetic field that faded over time.
The ages of craters can be estimated by morphological and stratigraphic classifications, with younger craters overlapping older impacts and generally showing less impact wear.
Methods for relative dating were developed when geology first emerged as a natural science.
Geologists still use the following principles today as a means to provide information about geological history and the timing of geological events.
The principle of uniformitarianism states that the geological processes observed in operation that modify the Earth's crust at present have worked in much the same way over geological time.
A fundamental principle of geology advanced by the 18th-century Scottish physician and geologist James Hutton is that "the present is the key to the past.
The principle of intrusive relationships concerns crosscutting intrusions.
In geology, when an igneous intrusion cuts across a formation of sedimentary rock, it can be determined that the igneous intrusion is younger than the sedimentary rock.
Different types of intrusions include stocks, laccoliths, batholiths, sills and dikes.
The principle of cross-cutting relationships pertains to the formation of faults and the age of the sequences through which they cut.
Faults are younger than the rocks they cut; accordingly, if a fault is found that penetrates some formations but not those on top of it, then the formations that were cut are older than the fault, and the ones that are not cut must be younger than the fault.
Finding the key bed in these situations may help determine whether the fault is a normal fault or a thrust fault.
The principle of inclusions and components states that, with sedimentary rocks, if inclusions (or clasts) are found in a formation, then the inclusions must be older than the formation that contains them.
For example, in sedimentary rocks, it is common for gravel from an older formation to be ripped up and included in a newer layer.
A similar situation with igneous rocks occurs when xenoliths are found.
These foreign bodies are picked up as magma or lava flows, and are incorporated, later to cool in the matrix.
As a result, xenoliths are older than the rock that contains them.
The principle of original horizontality states that the deposition of sediments occurs as essentially horizontal beds.
Observation of modern marine and non-marine sediments in a wide variety of environments supports this generalization (although cross-bedding is inclined, the overall orientation of cross-bedded units is horizontal).
The principle of superposition states that a sedimentary rock layer in a tectonically undisturbed sequence is younger than the one beneath it and older than the one above it.
Logically a younger layer cannot slip beneath a layer previously deposited.
This principle allows sedimentary layers to be viewed as a form of the vertical timeline, a partial or complete record of the time elapsed from deposition of the lowest layer to deposition of the highest bed.
The principle of faunal succession is based on the appearance of fossils in sedimentary rocks.
As organisms exist during the same period throughout the world, their presence or (sometimes) absence provides a relative age of the formations where they appear.
Based on principles that William Smith laid out almost a hundred years before the publication of Charles Darwin's theory of evolution, the principles of succession developed independently of evolutionary thought.
The principle becomes quite complex, however, given the uncertainties of fossilization, localization of fossil types due to lateral changes in habitat (facies change in sedimentary strata), and that not all fossils formed globally at the same time.
Geologists use methods to determine the absolute age of rock samples and geological events.
These may be used in conjunction with relative dating methods or to calibrate relative methods.
At the beginning of the 20th century, advancement in geological science was facilitated by the ability to obtain accurate absolute dates to geological events using radioactive isotopes and other methods.
This changed the understanding of geological time.
Previously, geologists could only use fossils and stratigraphic correlation to date sections of rock relative to one another.
With isotopic dates, it became possible to assign absolute ages to rock units, and these absolute dates could be applied to fossil sequences in which there was datable material, converting the old relative ages into new absolute ages.
For many geological applications, isotope ratios of radioactive elements are measured in minerals that give the amount of time that has passed since a rock passed through its particular closure temperature: the point at which different radiometric isotopes stop diffusing into and out of the crystal lattice.
These are used in geochronologic and thermochronologic studies.
The most suitable isotope systems for this purpose include uranium–lead, rubidium–strontium, and potassium–argon.
Uranium–thorium dating is used for dating calcium-carbonate.
Dating of lava and volcanic ash layers found within a stratigraphic sequence can provide absolute age data for sedimentary rock units that do not contain radioactive isotopes and calibrate relative dating techniques.
These methods can be used to determine ages of pluton emplacement.
Fractionation of the lanthanide series elements is used to compute ages since rocks were removed from the mantle.
Other methods are used for more recent events.
Optically stimulated luminescence and cosmogenic radionuclide dating are used to date surfaces and/or erosion rates.
Dendrochronology can be used for the dating of landscapes.
Radiocarbon dating is used for geologically young materials containing organic carbon.
Thermochemical techniques can be used to determine temperature profiles within the crust, the uplift of mountain ranges, and paleo-topography.
The geology of an area changes through time as rock units are deposited and inserted, and deformational processes alter their shapes and locations.
Rock units are first emplaced either by deposition onto the surface or intrusion into the overlying rock.
Deposition can occur when sediments settle onto the surface of the Earth and later lithify into sedimentary rock, or when as volcanic material such as volcanic ash or lava flows blanket the surface.
Igneous intrusions such as batholiths, laccoliths, dikes, and sills, push upwards into the overlying rock, and crystallize as they intrude.
After the initial sequence of rocks has been deposited, the rock units can be deformed and/or metamorphosed.
Deformation typically occurs as a result of horizontal shortening, horizontal extension, or side-to-side (strike-slip) motion.
These structural regimes broadly relate to convergent boundaries, divergent boundaries, and transform boundaries, respectively, between tectonic plates.
When rock units are placed under horizontal compression, they shorten and become thicker.
Because rock units, other than muds, do not significantly change in volume, this is accomplished in two primary ways: through faulting and folding.
In the shallow crust, where brittle deformation can occur, thrust faults form, which causes the deeper rock to move on top of the shallower rock.
Because deeper rock is often older, as noted by the principle of superposition, this can result in older rocks moving on top of younger ones.
Movement along faults can result in folding, either because the faults are not planar or because rock layers are dragged along, forming drag folds as slip occurs along the fault.
Deeper in the Earth, rocks behave plastically and fold instead of faulting.
These folds can either be those where the material in the center of the fold buckles upwards, creating "antiforms", or where it buckles downwards, creating "synforms".
If the tops of the rock units within the folds remain pointing upwards, they are called anticlines and synclines, respectively.
If some of the units in the fold are facing downward, the structure is called an overturned anticline or syncline, and if all of the rock units are overturned or the correct up-direction is unknown, they are simply called by the most general terms, antiforms, and synforms.
Even higher pressures and temperatures during horizontal shortening can cause both folding and metamorphism of the rocks.
This metamorphism causes changes in the mineral composition of the rocks; creates a foliation, or planar surface, that is related to mineral growth under stress.
This can remove signs of the original textures of the rocks, such as bedding in sedimentary rocks, flow features of lavas, and crystal patterns in crystalline rocks.
Extension causes the rock units as a whole to become longer and thinner.
This is primarily accomplished through normal faulting and through the ductile stretching and thinning.
Normal faults drop rock units that are higher below those that are lower.
This typically results in younger units ending up below older units.
Stretching of units can result in their thinning.
In fact, at one location within the Maria Fold and Thrust Belt, the entire sedimentary sequence of the Grand Canyon appears over a length of less than a meter.
Rocks at the depth to be ductilely stretched are often metamorphosed.
These stretched rocks can pinch into lenses, known as boudins, after the French word for "sausage" because of their visual similarity.
Where rock units slide past one another, strike-slip faults develop in shallow regions, and become shear zones at deeper depths where the rocks deform ductilely.
The addition of new rock units, both depositionally and intrusively, often occurs during deformation.
Faulting and other deformational processes result in the creation of topographic gradients, causing material on the rock unit that is increasing in elevation to be eroded by hillslopes and channels.
These sediments are deposited on the rock unit that is going down.
Continual motion along the fault maintains the topographic gradient in spite of the movement of sediment and continues to create accommodation space for the material to deposit.
Deformational events are often associated with volcanism and igneous activity.
Volcanic ashes and lavas accumulate on the surface, and igneous intrusions enter from below.
Dikes, long, planar igneous intrusions, enter along cracks, and therefore often form in large numbers in areas that are being actively deformed.
This can result in the emplacement of dike swarms, such as those that are observable across the Canadian shield, or rings of dikes around the lava tube of a volcano.
All of these processes do not necessarily occur in a single environment and do not necessarily occur in a single order.
The Hawaiian Islands, for example, consist almost entirely of layered basaltic lava flows.
The sedimentary sequences of the mid-continental United States and the Grand Canyon in the southwestern United States contain almost-undeformed stacks of sedimentary rocks that have remained in place since Cambrian time.
Other areas are much more geologically complex.
In the southwestern United States, sedimentary, volcanic, and intrusive rocks have been metamorphosed, faulted, foliated, and folded.
Even older rocks, such as the Acasta gneiss of the Slave craton in northwestern Canada, the oldest known rock in the world have been metamorphosed to the point where their origin is indiscernible without laboratory analysis.
These processes can occur in stages.
In many places, the Grand Canyon in the southwestern United States being a very visible example, the lower rock units were metamorphosed and deformed, and then deformation ended and the upper, undeformed units were deposited.
Although any amount of rock emplacement and rock deformation can occur, and they can occur any number of times, these concepts provide a guide to understanding the geological history of an area.
Geologists use a number of fields, laboratory, and numerical modeling methods to decipher Earth history and to understand the processes that occur on and inside the Earth.
In typical geological investigations, geologists use primary information related to petrology (the study of rocks), stratigraphy (the study of sedimentary layers), and structural geology (the study of positions of rock units and their deformation).
In many cases, geologists study modern soils, rivers, landscapes, and glaciers; investigate past and current life and biogeochemical pathways, and use geophysical methods to investigate the subsurface.
Sub-specialities of geology may distinguish endogenous and exogenous geology.
Geological field work varies depending on the task at hand.
Structural mapping: identifying the locations of major rock units and the faults and folds that led to their placement there.
In addition to identifying rocks in the field (lithology), petrologists identify rock samples in the laboratory.
Two of the primary methods for identifying rocks in the laboratory are through optical microscopy (such as with the petrographic microscope) and by using an electron microprobe.
In an optical mineralogy analysis, petrologists analyze thin sections of rock samples using a petrographic microscope, where the minerals can be identified through their different properties in plane-polarized and cross-polarized light, including their birefringence, pleochroism, twinning, and interference properties with a conoscopic lens.
In the electron microprobe, individual locations are analyzed for their exact chemical compositions and variation in composition within individual crystals.
Stable and radioactive isotope studies provide insight into the geochemical evolution of rock units.
Petrologists can use fluid inclusion data and perform high temperature and pressure physical experiments to understand the temperatures and pressures at which different mineral phases appear, and how they change through igneous and metamorphic processes.
This research can be extrapolated to the field to understand metamorphic processes and the conditions of crystallization of igneous rocks.
This work can help to explain processes that occur within the Earth, such as subduction and magma chamber evolution.
Structural geologists use microscopic analysis of oriented thin sections of geological samples to observe the fabric within the rocks, which gives information about strain within the crystalline structure of the rocks.
They plot and combine measurements of geological structures to better understand the orientations of faults and folds to reconstruct the history of rock deformation in the area.
In addition, they perform analog and numerical experiments of rock deformation in large and small settings.
The analysis of structures is often accomplished by plotting the orientations of various features onto stereonets.
A stereonet is a stereographic projection of a sphere onto a plane, in which planes are projected as lines and lines are projected as points.
These can be used to find the locations of fold axes, relationships between faults, and relationships between other geological structures.
Among the most well-known experiments in structural geology are those involving orogenic wedges, which are zones in which mountains are built along convergent tectonic plate boundaries.
In the analog versions of these experiments, horizontal layers of sand are pulled along a lower surface into a back stop, which results in realistic-looking patterns of faulting and the growth of a critically tapered (all angles remain the same) orogenic wedge.
Numerical models work in the same way as these analog models, though they are often more sophisticated and can include patterns of erosion and uplift in the mountain belt.
This helps to show the relationship between erosion and the shape of a mountain range.
These studies can give useful information about pathways for metamorphism through pressure, temperature, space, and time.
In the laboratory, stratigraphers analyze samples of stratigraphic sections that can be returned from the field, such as those from drill cores.
Stratigraphers analyze data from geophysical surveys that show the locations of stratigraphic units in the subsurface.
Geophysical data and well logs can be combined to produce a better view of the subsurface, and stratigraphers often use computer programs to do this in three dimensions.
Stratigraphers can then use these data to reconstruct ancient processes occurring on the surface of the Earth, interpret past environments, and locate areas for water, coal, and hydrocarbon extraction.
In the laboratory, biostratigraphers analyze rock samples from outcrop and drill cores for the fossils found in them.
These fossils help scientists to date the core and to understand the depositional environment in which the rock units formed.
Geochronologists precisely date rocks within the stratigraphic section to provide better absolute bounds on the timing and rates of deposition.
Magnetic stratigraphers look for signs of magnetic reversals in igneous rock units within the drill cores.
Other scientists perform stable-isotope studies on the rocks to gain information about past climate.
With the advent of space exploration in the twentieth century, geologists have begun to look at other planetary bodies in the same ways that have been developed to study the Earth.
This new field of study is called planetary geology (sometimes known as astrogeology) and relies on known geological principles to study other bodies of the Solar System.
This is a major aspect of planetary science, and largely focuses on the terrestrial planets, icy moons, asteroids, comets, and meteorites.
However, some planetary geophysicists study the giant planets and exoplanets.
Although the Greek-language-origin prefix geo refers to Earth, "geology" is often used in conjunction with the names of other planetary bodies when describing their composition and internal processes: examples are "the geology of Mars" and "Lunar geology".
Specialized terms such as selenology (studies of the Moon), areology (of Mars), hermesology (of Mercury), etc.
Although planetary geologists are interested in studying all aspects of other planets, a significant focus is to search for evidence of past or present life on other worlds.
This has led to many missions whose primary or ancillary purpose is to examine planetary bodies for evidence of life.
One of these is the Phoenix lander, which analyzed Martian polar soil for water, chemical, and mineralogical constituents related to biological processes.
Economic geology is a branch of geology that deals with aspects of economic minerals that humankind uses to fulfill various needs.
Economic minerals are those extracted profitably for various practical uses.
Economic geologists help locate and manage the Earth's natural resources, such as petroleum and coal, as well as mineral resources, which include metals such as iron, copper, and uranium.
Mining geology consists of the extractions of mineral and ore resources from the Earth.
Some resources of economic interests include gemstones, metals such as gold and copper, and many industrial minerals such as asbestos, magnesite, perlite, mica, phosphates, zeolites, clay, silica, and pumice, as well as elements such as sulfur and helium.
Petroleum geologists study the locations of the subsurface of the Earth that can contain extractable hydrocarbons, especially petroleum and natural gas.
Because many of these reservoirs are found in sedimentary basins, they study the formation of these basins, their sedimentary and tectonic evolution, and the present-day positions of the rock units.
Engineering geology is the application of geological principles to engineering practice for the purpose of assuring that the geological factors affecting the location, design, construction, operation, and maintenance of engineering works are properly addressed.
Engineering geology is distinct from geological engineering, particularly in North America.
In the field of civil engineering, geological principles and analyses are used in order to ascertain the mechanical principles of the material on which structures are built.
This allows tunnels to be built without collapsing, bridges and skyscrapers to be built with sturdy foundations, and buildings to be built that will not settle in clay and mud.
Geology and geological principles can be applied to various environmental problems such as stream restoration, the restoration of brownfields, and the understanding of the interaction between natural habitat and the geological environment.
Groundwater hydrology, or hydrogeology, is used to locate groundwater, which can often provide a ready supply of uncontaminated water and is especially important in arid regions, and to monitor the spread of contaminants in groundwater wells.
Geologists obtain data through stratigraphy, boreholes, core samples, and ice cores.
Ice cores and sediment cores are used for paleoclimate reconstructions, which tell geologists about past and present temperature, precipitation, and sea level across the globe.
These datasets are our primary source of information on global climate change outside of instrumental data.
Geologists and geophysicists study natural hazards in order to enact safe building codes and warning systems that are used to prevent loss of property and life.
The study of the physical material of the Earth dates back at least to ancient Greece when Theophrastus (372–287 BCE) wrote the work Peri Lithon (On Stones).
During the Roman period, Pliny the Elder wrote in detail of the many minerals and metals, then in practical use – even correctly noting the origin of amber.
Additionally, in the 4th century BCE Aristotle made critical observations of the slow rate of geological change.
He observed the composition of the land and formulated a theory where the Earth changes at a slow rate and that these changes cannot be observed during one person's lifetime.
Aristotle developed one of the first evidence-based concepts connected to the geological realm regarding the rate at which the Earth physically changes.
Abu al-Rayhan al-Biruni (973–1048 CE) was one of the earliest Persian geologists, whose works included the earliest writings on the geology of India, hypothesizing that the Indian subcontinent was once a sea.
Drawing from Greek and Indian scientific literature that were not destroyed by the Muslim conquests, the Persian scholar Ibn Sina (Avicenna, 981–1037) proposed detailed explanations for the formation of mountains, the origin of earthquakes, and other topics central to modern geology, which provided an essential foundation for the later development of the science.
In China, the polymath Shen Kuo (1031–1095) formulated a hypothesis for the process of land formation: based on his observation of fossil animal shells in a geological stratum in a mountain hundreds of miles from the ocean, he inferred that the land was formed by the erosion of the mountains and by deposition of silt.
Georgius Agricola (1494–1555) published his groundbreaking work De Natura Fossilium in 1546 and is seen as the founder of geology as a scientific discipline.
Nicolas Steno (1638–1686) is credited with the law of superposition, the principle of original horizontality, and the principle of lateral continuity: three defining principles of stratigraphy.
The word geology was first used by Ulisse Aldrovandi in 1603, then by Jean-André Deluc in 1778 and introduced as a fixed term by Horace-Bénédict de Saussure in 1779.
The word is derived from the Greek γῆ, gê, meaning "earth" and λόγος, logos, meaning "speech".
But according to another source, the word "geology" comes from a Norwegian, Mikkel Pedersøn Escholt (1600–1669), who was a priest and scholar.
Escholt first used the definition in his book titled, Geologia Norvegica (1657).
William Smith (1769–1839) drew some of the first geological maps and began the process of ordering rock strata (layers) by examining the fossils contained in them.
In 1763, Mikhail Lomonosov published his treatise On the Strata of Earth.
His work was the first narrative of modern geology, based on the unity of processes in time and explanation of the Earth's past from the present.
James Hutton (1726–1797) is often viewed as the first modern geologist.
In 1785 he presented a paper entitled Theory of the Earth to the Royal Society of Edinburgh.
In his paper, he explained his theory that the Earth must be much older than had previously been supposed to allow enough time for mountains to be eroded and for sediments to form new rocks at the bottom of the sea, which in turn were raised up to become dry land.
Hutton published a two-volume version of his ideas in 1795.
Followers of Hutton were known as Plutonists because they believed that some rocks were formed by vulcanism, which is the deposition of lava from volcanoes, as opposed to the Neptunists, led by Abraham Werner, who believed that all rocks had settled out of a large ocean whose level gradually dropped over time.
The first geological map of the U.
In 1807, Maclure commenced the self-imposed task of making a geological survey of the United States.
Almost every state in the Union was traversed and mapped by him, the Allegheny Mountains being crossed and recrossed some 50 times.
The results of his unaided labours were submitted to the American Philosophical Society in a memoir entitled Observations on the Geology of the United States explanatory of a Geological Map, and published in the Society's Transactions, together with the nation's first geological map.
This antedates William Smith's geological map of England by six years, although it was constructed using a different classification of rocks.
Sir Charles Lyell (1797–1875) first published his famous book, Principles of Geology, in 1830.
This book, which influenced the thought of Charles Darwin, successfully promoted the doctrine of uniformitarianism.
This theory states that slow geological processes have occurred throughout the Earth's history and are still occurring today.
In contrast, catastrophism is the theory that Earth's features formed in single, catastrophic events and remained unchanged thereafter.
Though Hutton believed in uniformitarianism, the idea was not widely accepted at the time.
Much of 19th-century geology revolved around the question of the Earth's exact age.
Estimates varied from a few hundred thousand to billions of years.
By the early 20th century, radiometric dating allowed the Earth's age to be estimated at two billion years.
The awareness of this vast amount of time opened the door to new theories about the processes that shaped the planet.
Some of the most significant advances in 20th-century geology have been the development of the theory of plate tectonics in the 1960s and the refinement of estimates of the planet's age.
Plate tectonics theory arose from two separate geological observations: seafloor spreading and continental drift.
The theory revolutionized the Earth sciences.
Today the Earth is known to be approximately 4.
One Geology: This interactive geological map of the world is an international initiative of the geological surveys around the globe.
This groundbreaking project was launched in 2007 and contributed to the 'International Year of Planet Earth', becoming one of their flagship projects.
The principles and objects of geology, with special reference to the geology of Egypt (1911), W.
Ecology (from Ancient Greek οἶκος (oîkos) 'house' and -λογία (-logía) 'study of') is the natural science of the relationships among living organisms and their environment.
Ecology considers organisms at the individual, population, community, ecosystem, and biosphere levels.
Ecology overlaps with the closely related sciences of biogeography, evolutionary biology, genetics, ethology, and natural history.
Ecology is a branch of biology, and is the study of abundance, biomass, and distribution of organisms in the context of the environment.
It encompasses life processes, interactions, and adaptations; movement of materials and energy through living communities; successional development of ecosystems; cooperation, competition, and predation within and between species; and patterns of biodiversity and its effect on ecosystem processes.
Ecology has practical applications in fields such as conservation biology, wetland management, natural resource management, and human ecology.
The term ecology (German: Ökologie) was coined in 1866 by the German scientist Ernst Haeckel.
The science of ecology as it is known today began with a group of American botanists in the 1890s.
Evolutionary concepts relating to adaptation and natural selection are cornerstones of modern ecological theory.
Ecosystems are dynamically interacting systems of organisms, the communities they make up, and the non-living (abiotic) components of their environment.
Ecosystem processes, such as primary production, nutrient cycling, and niche construction, regulate the flux of energy and matter through an environment.
Ecosystems have biophysical feedback mechanisms that moderate processes acting on living (biotic) and abiotic components of the planet.
Ecosystems sustain life-supporting functions and provide ecosystem services such as biomass production (food, fuel, fiber, and medicine), the regulation of climate, global biogeochemical cycles, water filtration, soil formation, erosion control, flood protection, and many other natural features of scientific, historical, economic, or intrinsic value.
Ecosystems vary from tiny to vast.
A single tree is of little consequence to the classification of a forest ecosystem, but is critically relevant to organisms living in and on it.
Several generations of an aphid population can exist over the lifespan of a single leaf.
Each of those aphids, in turn, supports diverse bacterial communities.
The nature of connections in ecological communities cannot be explained by knowing the details of each species in isolation, because the emergent pattern is neither revealed nor predicted until the ecosystem is studied as an integrated whole.
The main subdisciplines of ecology, population (or community) ecology and ecosystem ecology, differ in their contrasting paradigms.
The former focuses on organisms' distribution and abundance, while the latter focuses on materials and energy fluxes.
To structure the study of ecology into a conceptually manageable framework, the biological world is organized into a hierarchy, ranging in scale from (as far as ecology is concerned) organisms, to populations, to guilds, to communities, to ecosystems, to biomes, and up to the level of the biosphere.
This framework forms a panarchy and exhibits non-linear behaviors; this means that "effect and cause are disproportionate, so that small changes to critical variables, such as the number of nitrogen fixers, can lead to disproportionate, perhaps irreversible, changes in the system properties.
Biodiversity (an abbreviation of "biological diversity") describes the diversity of life from genes to ecosystems and spans every level of biological organization.
The term has several interpretations, and there are many ways to index, measure, characterize, and represent its complex organization.
Biodiversity includes species diversity, ecosystem diversity, and genetic diversity and scientists are interested in the way that this diversity affects the complex ecological processes operating at and among these respective levels.
Biodiversity plays an important role in ecosystem services which by definition maintain and improve human quality of life.
It delivers ecosystem services across heterogeneous real-world landscapes, influenced by human management and environmental conditions.
Conservation priorities and management techniques require different approaches and considerations to address the full ecological scope of biodiversity.
Natural capital that supports populations is critical for maintaining ecosystem services and species migration (e.
An understanding of biodiversity has practical applications for species and ecosystem-level conservation planners as they make management recommendations to consulting firms, governments, and industry.
The habitat of a species describes the environment over which it occurs and the type of community that is formed.
More specifically, "habitats can be defined as regions in environmental space that are composed of multiple dimensions, each representing a biotic or abiotic environmental variable; that is, any component or characteristic of the environment related directly (e.
Definitions of niche date back to 1917.
Evelyn Hutchinson introduced "the set of biotic and abiotic conditions in which a species is able to persist and maintain stable population sizes.
The fundamental niche is the set of environmental conditions under which a species is able to persist.
The realized niche is the set of environmental plus ecological conditions under which a species persists.
The Hutchinsonian niche is defined more technically as a "Euclidean hyperspace whose dimensions are defined as environmental variables and whose size is a function of the number of values that the environmental values may assume for which an organism has positive fitness.
Organisms are subject to environmental pressures, but they also modify their habitats.
The regulatory feedback between organisms and their environment can affect conditions from local (e.
Ecosystem engineering is related to niche construction, but the former relates only to the physical modifications of the habitat whereas the latter also considers the evolutionary implications of physical changes to the environment and feedback on natural selection.
Ecosystem engineers are defined as: "organisms that directly or indirectly modulate the availability of resources to other species, by causing physical state changes in biotic or abiotic materials.
In so doing they modify, maintain and create habitats.
Biomes are larger units of organization that categorize regions of the Earth's ecosystems, mainly according to the structure and composition of vegetation.
There are different methods to define the continental boundaries of biomes dominated by different functional types of vegetative communities that are limited in distribution by climate, precipitation, weather, and other environmental variables.
Biomes include tropical rainforest, temperate broadleaf and mixed forest, temperate deciduous forest, taiga, tundra, hot desert, and polar desert.
Other researchers have recently categorized other biomes, such as the human and oceanic microbiomes.
To a microbe, the human body is a habitat and a landscape.
Microbiomes were discovered largely through advances in molecular genetics, which have revealed a hidden richness of microbial diversity on the planet.
The oceanic microbiome plays a significant role in the ecological biogeochemistry of the planet's oceans.
The largest scale of ecological organization is the biosphere: the total sum of ecosystems on the planet.
Ecological relationships regulate the flux of energy, nutrients, and climate all the way up to the planetary scale.
For example, the dynamic history of the planetary atmosphere's CO2 and O2 composition has been affected by the biogenic flux of gases coming from respiration and photosynthesis, with levels fluctuating over time in relation to the ecology and evolution of plants and animals.
Ecological theory has also been used to explain self-emergent regulatory phenomena at the planetary scale: for example, the Gaia hypothesis is an example of holism applied in ecological theory.
The Gaia hypothesis states that there is an emergent feedback loop generated by the metabolism of living organisms that maintains the core temperature of the Earth and atmospheric conditions within a narrow self-regulating range of tolerance.
Population ecology studies the dynamics of species populations and how these populations interact with the wider environment.
A population consists of individuals of the same species that live, interact, and migrate through the same niche and habitat.
A primary law of population ecology is the Malthusian growth model which states, "a population will grow (or decline) exponentially as long as the environment experienced by all individuals in the population remains constant.
An example of an introductory population model describes a closed population, such as on an island, where immigration and emigration does not take place.
Hypotheses are evaluated with reference to a null hypothesis which states that random processes create the observed data.
Population ecology builds upon these introductory models to further understand demographic processes in real study populations.
Commonly used types of data include life history, fecundity, and survivorship, and these are analyzed using mathematical techniques such as matrix algebra.
The information is used for managing wildlife stocks and setting harvest quotas.
In cases where basic models are insufficient, ecologists may adopt different kinds of statistical methods, such as the Akaike information criterion, or use models that can become mathematically complex as "several competing hypotheses are simultaneously confronted with the data.
The concept of metapopulations was defined in 1969 as "a population of populations which go extinct locally and recolonize".
Metapopulation ecology is another statistical approach that is often used in conservation research.
Metapopulation models simplify the landscape into patches of varying levels of quality, and metapopulations are linked by the migratory behaviours of organisms.
Animal migration is set apart from other kinds of movement because it involves the seasonal departure and return of individuals from a habitat.
Migration is also a population-level phenomenon, as with the migration routes followed by plants as they occupied northern post-glacial environments.
Plant ecologists use pollen records that accumulate and stratify in wetlands to reconstruct the timing of plant migration and dispersal relative to historic and contemporary climates.
These migration routes involved an expansion of the range as plant populations expanded from one area to another.
There is a larger taxonomy of movement, such as commuting, foraging, territorial behavior, stasis, and ranging.
Dispersal is usually distinguished from migration because it involves the one-way permanent movement of individuals from their birth population into another population.
Community ecology is the study of the interactions among a collection of species that inhabit the same geographic area.
Community ecologists study the determinants of patterns and processes for two or more interacting species.
Research in community ecology might measure species diversity in grasslands in relation to soil fertility.
It might also include the analysis of predator-prey dynamics, competition among similar plant species, or mutualistic interactions between crabs and corals.
The underlying concept of an ecosystem can be traced back to 1864 in the published work of George Perkins Marsh ("Man and Nature").
Ecosystems may be habitats within biomes that form an integrated whole and a dynamically responsive system having both physical and biological complexes.
Ecosystem ecology is the science of determining the fluxes of materials (e.
Ecosystem ecologists attempt to determine the underlying causes of these fluxes.
Research in ecosystem ecology might measure primary production (g C/m^2) in a wetland in relation to decomposition and consumption rates (g C/m^2/y).
This requires an understanding of the community connections between plants (i.
A food web is the archetypal ecological network.
Plants capture solar energy and use it to synthesize simple sugars during photosynthesis.
As plants grow, they accumulate nutrients and are eaten by grazing herbivores, and the energy is transferred through a chain of organisms by consumption.
The simplified linear feeding pathways that move from a basal trophic species to a top consumer is called the food chain.
Food chains in an ecological community create a complex food web.
Food webs are a type of concept map used to illustrate and study pathways of energy and material flows.
A trophic level (from Greek troph, τροφή, trophē, meaning "food" or "feeding") is "a group of organisms acquiring a considerable majority of its energy from the lower adjacent level (according to ecological pyramids) nearer the abiotic source.
Biodiversity within ecosystems can be organized into trophic pyramids, in which the vertical dimension represents feeding relations that become further removed from the base of the food chain up toward top predators, and the horizontal dimension represents the abundance or biomass at each level.
When the relative abundance or biomass of each species is sorted into its respective trophic level, they naturally sort into a 'pyramid of numbers'.
Species are broadly categorized as autotrophs (or primary producers), heterotrophs (or consumers), and Detritivores (or decomposers).
Autotrophs are organisms that produce their own food (production is greater than respiration) by photosynthesis or chemosynthesis.
Heterotrophs are organisms that must feed on others for nourishment and energy (respiration exceeds production).
Heterotrophs can be further sub-divided into different functional groups, including primary consumers (strict herbivores), secondary consumers (carnivorous predators that feed exclusively on herbivores), and tertiary consumers (predators that feed on a mix of herbivores and predators).
Omnivores do not fit neatly into a functional category because they eat both plant and animal tissues.
It has been suggested that omnivores have a greater functional influence as predators because compared to herbivores, they are relatively inefficient at grazing.
Trophic levels are part of the holistic or complex systems view of ecosystems.
Each trophic level contains unrelated species that are grouped together because they share common ecological functions, giving a macroscopic view of the system.
While the notion of trophic levels provides insight into energy flow and top-down control within food webs, it is troubled by the prevalence of omnivory in real ecosystems.
This has led some ecologists to "reiterate that the notion that species clearly aggregate into discrete, homogeneous trophic levels is fiction.
A keystone species is a species that is connected to a disproportionately large number of other species in the food-web.
Keystone species have lower levels of biomass in the trophic pyramid relative to the importance of their role.
The many connections that a keystone species holds means that it maintains the organization and structure of entire communities.
The loss of a keystone species results in a range of dramatic cascading effects (termed trophic cascades) that alters trophic dynamics, other food web connections, and can cause the extinction of other species.
The term keystone species was coined by Robert Paine in 1969 and is a reference to the keystone architectural feature as the removal of a keystone species can result in a community collapse just as the removal of the keystone in an arch can result in the arch's loss of stability.
Sea otters (Enhydra lutris) are commonly cited as an example because they limit the density of sea urchins that feed on kelp.
If sea otters are removed from the system, the urchins graze until the kelp beds disappear, and this has a dramatic effect on community structure.
Complexity is understood as a large computational effort needed to assemble numerous interacting parts.
Global patterns of biological diversity are complex.
This biocomplexity stems from the interplay among ecological processes that influence patterns at different scales, such as transitional areas or ecotones spanning landscapes.
Complexity stems from the interplay among levels of biological organization as energy, and matter is integrated into larger units that superimpose onto the smaller parts.
Small scale patterns do not necessarily explain larger ones, as in Aristotle's expression "the sum is greater than the parts".
Holism is a critical part of the theory of ecology.
Holism addresses the biological organization of life that self-organizes into layers of emergent whole systems that function according to non-reducible properties.
This means that higher-order patterns of a whole functional system, such as an ecosystem, cannot be predicted or understood by a simple summation of the parts.
Ecology and evolutionary biology are sister disciplines.
Natural selection, life history, development, adaptation, populations, and inheritance thread equally into both.
In this framework, the analytical tools of ecologists and evolutionists overlap as they study life through phylogenetics or Linnaean taxonomy.
There is no sharp boundary separating ecology from evolution, and they differ more in their areas of applied focus.
Both explain properties and processes across different spatial or temporal scales of organization.
Ecologists study the abiotic and biotic factors that influence evolutionary processes, and evolution can be rapid, occurring on ecological timescales as short as one generation.
All organisms have behaviours.
Even plants express complex behaviour, including memory and communication.
Behavioural ecology is the study of an organism's behaviour in its environment and its ecological and evolutionary implications.
Ethology is the study of observable movement or behaviour in animals.
This could include investigations of motile sperm of plants, mobile phytoplankton, zooplankton swimming toward the female egg, the cultivation of fungi by weevils, the mating dance of a salamander, or social gatherings of amoeba.
Adaptation is the central unifying concept in behavioural ecology.
Behaviours can be recorded as traits and inherited in much the same way that eye and hair colour can.
Behaviours can evolve by means of natural selection as adaptive traits conferring functional utilities that increases reproductive fitness.
Cognitive ecology integrates theory and observations from evolutionary ecology and cognitive science, to understand the effect of animal interaction with their habitat on their cognitive systems.
With consideration of the selection pressure on cognition, cognitive ecology can contribute intellectual coherence to the multidisciplinary study of cognition.
Social-ecological behaviours are notable in the social insects, slime moulds, social spiders, human society, and naked mole-rats where eusocialism has evolved.
Social behaviours include reciprocally beneficial behaviours among kin and nest mates and evolve from kin and group selection.
Kin selection explains altruism through genetic relationships, whereby an altruistic behaviour leading to death is rewarded by the survival of genetic copies distributed among surviving relatives.
The social insects, including ants, bees, and wasps are most famously studied for this type of relationship because the male drones are clones that share the same genetic make-up as every other male in the colony.
In contrast, group selectionists find examples of altruism among non-genetic relatives and explain this through selection acting on the group; whereby, it becomes selectively advantageous for groups if their members express altruistic behaviours to one another.
Groups with predominantly altruistic members survive better than groups with predominantly selfish members.
Ecological interactions can be classified broadly into a host and an associate relationship.
A host is any entity that harbours another that is called the associate.
Relationships between species that are mutually or reciprocally beneficial are called mutualisms.
Examples of mutualism include fungus-growing ants employing agricultural symbiosis, bacteria living in the guts of insects and other organisms, the fig wasp and yucca moth pollination complex, lichens with fungi and photosynthetic algae, and corals with photosynthetic algae.
If there is a physical connection between host and associate, the relationship is called symbiosis.
Approximately 60% of all plants, for example, have a symbiotic relationship with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi living in their roots forming an exchange network of carbohydrates for mineral nutrients.
Biogeography is the comparative study of the geographic distribution of organisms and the corresponding evolution of their traits in space and time.
The Journal of Biogeography was established in 1974.
Biogeography and ecology share many of their disciplinary roots.
Island biogeography, published by Robert MacArthur and Edward O.
Wilson in 1967, is one of the fundamentals of ecological theory.
Biogeography has a long history in the natural sciences concerning the spatial distribution of plants and animals.
Ecology and evolution provide the explanatory context for biogeographical studies.
Biogeographical patterns result from ecological processes that influence range distributions, such as migration and dispersal.
The biogeographic processes that result in the natural splitting of species explain much of the modern distribution of the Earth's biota.
The splitting of lineages in a species is called vicariance biogeography and it is a sub-discipline of biogeography.
There are also practical applications in the field of biogeography concerning ecological systems and processes.
For example, the range and distribution of biodiversity and invasive species responding to climate change is a serious concern and active area of research in the context of global warming.
Its premise is that natural selection varies with population density.
For example, when an island is first colonized, density of individuals is low.
The initial increase in population size is not limited by competition, leaving an abundance of available resources for rapid population growth.
These early phases of population growth experience density-independent forces of natural selection, which is called r-selection.
As the population becomes more crowded, it approaches the island's carrying capacity, thus forcing individuals to compete more heavily for fewer available resources.
Under crowded conditions, the population experiences density-dependent forces of natural selection, called K-selection.
In the r/K-selection model, the first variable r is the intrinsic rate of natural increase in population size and the second variable K is the carrying capacity of a population.
The relationship between ecology and genetic inheritance predates modern techniques for molecular analysis.
Molecular ecological research became more feasible with the development of rapid and accessible genetic technologies, such as the polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
The rise of molecular technologies and the influx of research questions into this new field resulted in the publication Molecular Ecology in 1992.
Molecular ecology uses analytical techniques to study genes in an evolutionary and ecological context.
In 1994, John Avise played a leading role in this area of science with the publication of his book, Molecular Markers, Natural History and Evolution.
Ecology is both a biological science and a human science.
Human ecology is an interdisciplinary investigation into the ecology of our species.
A truly interdisciplinary human ecology will most likely address itself to all three.
Ecology is an employed science of restoration, repairing disturbed sites through human intervention, in natural resource management, and in environmental impact assessments.
Wilson predicted in 1992 that the 21st century "will be the era of restoration in ecology".
The environment of ecosystems includes both physical parameters and biotic attributes.
It is dynamically interlinked and contains resources for organisms at any time throughout their life cycle.
Like ecology, the term environment has different conceptual meanings and overlaps with the concept of nature.
Environment "includes the physical world, the social world of human relations and the built world of human creation.
The biotic environment includes genes, cells, organisms, members of the same species (conspecifics) and other species that share a habitat.
A disturbance is any process that changes or removes biomass from a community, such as a fire, flood, drought, or predation.
Disturbances are both the cause and product of natural fluctuations within an ecological community.
Biodiversity can protect ecosystems from disturbances.
The Earth was formed approximately 4.
As it cooled and a crust and oceans formed, its atmosphere transformed from being dominated by hydrogen to one composed mostly of methane and ammonia.
Over the next billion years, the metabolic activity of life transformed the atmosphere into a mixture of carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and water vapor.
These gases changed the way that light from the sun hit the Earth's surface and greenhouse effects trapped heat.
There were untapped sources of free energy within the mixture of reducing and oxidizing gasses that set the stage for primitive ecosystems to evolve and, in turn, the atmosphere also evolved.
Throughout history, the Earth's atmosphere and biogeochemical cycles have been in a dynamic equilibrium with planetary ecosystems.
The history is characterized by periods of significant transformation followed by millions of years of stability.
The evolution of the earliest organisms, likely anaerobic methanogen microbes, started the process by converting atmospheric hydrogen into methane (4H2 + CO2 → CH4 + 2H2O).
Anoxygenic photosynthesis reduced hydrogen concentrations and increased atmospheric methane, by converting hydrogen sulfide into water or other sulfur compounds (for example, 2H2S + CO2 + hv → CH2O + H2O + 2S).
Early forms of fermentation also increased levels of atmospheric methane.
The transition to an oxygen-dominant atmosphere (the Great Oxidation) did not begin until approximately 2.
The biology of life operates within a certain range of temperatures.
Heat is a form of energy that regulates temperature.
Heat affects growth rates, activity, behaviour, and primary production.
Temperature is largely dependent on the incidence of solar radiation.
The latitudinal and longitudinal spatial variation of temperature greatly affects climates and consequently the distribution of biodiversity and levels of primary production in different ecosystems or biomes across the planet.
Heat and temperature relate importantly to metabolic activity.
Poikilotherms have a body temperature largely dependent on the temperature of the external environment.
In contrast, homeotherms regulate their internal body temperature by expending metabolic energy.
There is a relationship between light, primary production, and ecological energy budgets.
Sunlight is the primary input of energy into the planet's ecosystems.
Light is composed of electromagnetic energy of different wavelengths.
Radiant energy from the sun generates heat, provides photons of light measured as active energy in the chemical reactions of life, and also acts as a catalyst for genetic mutation.
Plants, algae, and some bacteria absorb light and assimilate the energy through photosynthesis.
Organisms capable of assimilating energy by photosynthesis or through inorganic fixation of H2S are autotrophs.
Autotrophs—responsible for primary production—assimilate light energy which becomes metabolically stored as potential energy in the form of biochemical enthalpic bonds.
Diffusion of carbon dioxide and oxygen is approximately 10,000 times slower in water than in air.
When soils are flooded, they quickly lose oxygen, becoming hypoxic (an environment with O2 concentration below 2 mg/liter) and eventually completely anoxic where anaerobic bacteria thrive among the roots.
Water influences the intensity and spectral composition of light as it reflects off the water surface and submerged particles.
Salt water plants (halophytes) have additional specialized adaptations, such as the development of special organs for shedding salt and osmoregulating their internal salt (NaCl) concentrations, to live in estuarine, brackish, or oceanic environments.
The physiology of fish is adapted to compensate for environmental salt levels through osmoregulation.
Their gills form electrochemical gradients that mediate salt excretion in salt water and uptake in fresh water.
The shape and energy of the land are significantly affected by gravitational forces.
These govern many of the geophysical properties and distributions of biomes across the Earth.
On the organismal scale, gravitational forces provide directional cues for plant and fungal growth (gravitropism), orientation cues for animal migrations, and influence the biomechanics and size of animals.
Ecological traits, such as allocation of biomass in trees during growth are subject to mechanical failure as gravitational forces influence the position and structure of branches and leaves.
The cardiovascular systems of animals are functionally adapted to overcome the pressure and gravitational forces that change according to the features of organisms (e.
Climatic and osmotic pressure places physiological constraints on organisms, especially those that fly and respire at high altitudes, or dive to deep ocean depths.
These constraints influence vertical limits of ecosystems in the biosphere, as organisms are physiologically sensitive and adapted to atmospheric and osmotic water pressure differences.
For example, oxygen levels decrease with decreasing pressure and are a limiting factor for life at higher altitudes.
Water transportation by plants is affected by osmotic pressure gradients.
Water pressure in the depths of oceans requires that organisms adapt to these conditions.
For example, diving animals such as whales, dolphins, and seals are adapted to deal with changes in sound due to water pressure differences.
Turbulent forces in air and water affect the environment and ecosystem distribution, form, and dynamics.
On a planetary scale, ecosystems are affected by circulation patterns in the global trade winds.
Wind power and the turbulent forces it creates can influence heat, nutrient, and biochemical profiles of ecosystems.
For example, wind running over the surface of a lake creates turbulence, mixing the water column and influencing the environmental profile to create thermally layered zones, affecting how fish, algae, and other parts of the aquatic ecosystem are structured.
Wind speed and turbulence influence evapotranspiration rates and energy budgets in plants and animals.
Wind speed, temperature and moisture content vary as winds travel across different land features and elevations.
For example, the westerlies come into contact with the coastal and interior mountains of western North America to produce a rain shadow on the leeward side of the mountain.
The air expands and moisture condenses as the winds increase in elevation; this is called orographic lift and can cause precipitation.
This environmental process produces spatial divisions in biodiversity, as species adapted to wetter conditions are range-restricted to the coastal mountain valleys and unable to migrate across the xeric ecosystems to intermix with sister lineages that are segregated to the interior mountain systems.
Plants convert carbon dioxide into biomass and emit oxygen into the atmosphere.
By approximately 350 million years ago (the end of the Devonian period), photosynthesis had brought the concentration of atmospheric oxygen above 17%, which allowed combustion to occur.
Fire releases CO2 and converts fuel into ash and tar.
Fire is a significant ecological parameter that raises many issues pertaining to its control and suppression.
While the issue of fire in relation to ecology and plants has been recognized for a long time, Charles Cooper brought attention to the issue of forest fires in relation to the ecology of forest fire suppression and management in the 1960s.
Soil is the living top layer of mineral and organic dirt that covers the surface of the planet.
It is the chief organizing centre of most ecosystem functions, and it is of critical importance in agricultural science and ecology.
The decomposition of dead organic matter (for example, leaves on the forest floor), results in soils containing minerals and nutrients that feed into plant production.
The whole of the planet's soil ecosystems is called the pedosphere where a large biomass of the Earth's biodiversity organizes into trophic levels.
Invertebrates that feed and shred larger leaves, for example, create smaller bits for smaller organisms in the feeding chain.
Collectively, these organisms are the detritivores that regulate soil formation.
Soils form composite phenotypes where inorganic matter is enveloped into the physiology of a whole community.
As organisms feed and migrate through soils they physically displace materials, an ecological process called bioturbation.
This aerates soils and stimulates heterotrophic growth and production.
Soil microorganisms are influenced by and are fed back into the trophic dynamics of the ecosystem.
Ecologists study nutrient budgets to understand how these materials are regulated, flow, and recycled through the environment.
This research has led to an understanding that there is global feedback between ecosystems and the physical parameters of this planet, including minerals, soil, pH, ions, water, and atmospheric gases.
Six major elements (hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, and phosphorus; H, C, N, O, S, and P) form the constitution of all biological macromolecules and feed into the Earth's geochemical processes.
From the smallest scale of biology, the combined effect of billions of ecological processes amplify and regulate the biogeochemical cycles of the Earth.
Ecology has a complex origin.
Ancient Greek philosophers such as Hippocrates and Aristotle recorded observations on natural history.
However, they saw species as unchanging, while varieties were seen as aberrations.
Modern ecology sees varieties as the real phenomena, leading to adaptation by natural selection.
Ecological concepts such as a balance and regulation in nature can be traced to Herodotus (died c.
Basking Nile crocodiles, he noted, opened their mouths to give sandpipers safe access to pluck leeches out, giving nutrition to the sandpiper and oral hygiene for the crocodile.
Aristotle and his student Theophrastus observed plant and animal migrations, biogeography, physiology, and their behavior, giving an early analogue to the concept of an ecological niche.
Ecological concepts such as food chains, population regulation, and productivity were developed in the 1700s, through the works of microscopist Antonie van Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723) and botanist Richard Bradley (1688?
Biogeographer Alexander von Humboldt (1769–1859) recognized ecological gradients, where species are replaced or altered in form along environmental gradients.
Humboldt drew inspiration from Isaac Newton, as he developed a form of "terrestrial physics".
Natural historians, such as Humboldt, James Hutton, and Jean-Baptiste Lamarck laid the foundations of ecology.
The term "ecology" (German: Oekologie, Ökologie) was coined by Ernst Haeckel in his book Generelle Morphologie der Organismen (1866).
Haeckel was a zoologist, artist, writer, and later in life a professor of comparative anatomy.
Linnaeus founded an early branch of ecology that he called the economy of nature.
He influenced Charles Darwin, who adopted Linnaeus' phrase in The Origin of Species.
Linnaeus was the first to frame the balance of nature as a testable hypothesis.
Modern ecology first attracted substantial scientific attention toward the end of the 19th century.
Ellen Swallow Richards adopted the term "oekology" in the U.
In the early 20th century, ecology transitioned from description to a more analytical form of scientific natural history.
Frederic Clements published the first American ecology book, Research Methods in Ecology in 1905, presenting the idea of plant communities as a superorganism.
This launched a debate between ecological holism and individualism that lasted until the 1970s.
In 1942, Raymond Lindeman wrote a landmark paper on the trophic dynamics of ecology.
Trophic dynamics became the foundation for much work on energy and material flow through ecosystems.
Robert MacArthur advanced mathematical theory, predictions, and tests in ecology in the 1950s.
Ecology surged in popular and scientific interest during the 1960–1970s environmental movement.
In 1962, marine biologist and ecologist Rachel Carson's book Silent Spring helped to mobilize the environmental movement by alerting the public to toxic pesticides, such as DDT (C14H9Cl5), bioaccumulating in the environment.
Since then, ecologists have worked to bridge their understanding of the degradation of the planet's ecosystems with environmental politics, law, restoration, and natural resources management.
Evolution is the change in the heritable characteristics of biological populations over successive generations.
It occurs when evolutionary processes such as genetic drift and natural selection act on genetic variation, resulting in certain characteristics becoming more or less common within a population over successive generations.
The process of evolution has given rise to biodiversity at every level of biological organisation.
The scientific theory of evolution by natural selection was conceived independently by two British naturalists, Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace, in the mid-19th century as an explanation for why organisms are adapted to their physical and biological environments.
The theory was first set out in detail in Darwin's book On the Origin of Species.
Evolution by natural selection is established by observable facts about living organisms: (1) more offspring are often produced than can possibly survive; (2) traits vary among individuals with respect to their morphology, physiology, and behaviour; (3) different traits confer different rates of survival and reproduction (differential fitness); and (4) traits can be passed from generation to generation (heritability of fitness).
In successive generations, members of a population are therefore more likely to be replaced by the offspring of parents with favourable characteristics for that environment.
In the early 20th century, competing ideas of evolution were refuted and evolution was combined with Mendelian inheritance and population genetics to give rise to modern evolutionary theory.
In this synthesis the basis for heredity is in DNA molecules that pass information from generation to generation.
The processes that change DNA in a population include natural selection, genetic drift, mutation, and gene flow.
All life on Earth—including humanity—shares a last universal common ancestor (LUCA), which lived approximately 3.
The fossil record includes a progression from early biogenic graphite to microbial mat fossils to fossilised multicellular organisms.
Existing patterns of biodiversity have been shaped by repeated formations of new species (speciation), changes within species (anagenesis), and loss of species (extinction) throughout the evolutionary history of life on Earth.
Morphological and biochemical traits tend to be more similar among species that share a more recent common ancestor, which historically was used to reconstruct phylogenetic trees, although direct comparison of genetic sequences is a more common method today.
Evolutionary biologists have continued to study various aspects of evolution by forming and testing hypotheses as well as constructing theories based on evidence from the field or laboratory and on data generated by the methods of mathematical and theoretical biology.
Their discoveries have influenced not just the development of biology but also other fields including agriculture, medicine, and computer science.
Evolution in organisms occurs through changes in heritable characteristics—the inherited characteristics of an organism.
In humans, for example, eye colour is an inherited characteristic and an individual might inherit the "brown-eye trait" from one of their parents.
Inherited traits are controlled by genes and the complete set of genes within an organism's genome (genetic material) is called its genotype.
The complete set of observable traits that make up the structure and behaviour of an organism is called its phenotype.
Some of these traits come from the interaction of its genotype with the environment while others are neutral.
Some observable characteristics are not inherited.
For example, suntanned skin comes from the interaction between a person's genotype and sunlight; thus, suntans are not passed on to people's children.
The phenotype is the ability of the skin to tan when exposed to sunlight.
However, some people tan more easily than others, due to differences in genotypic variation; a striking example are people with the inherited trait of albinism, who do not tan at all and are very sensitive to sunburn.
Heritable characteristics are passed from one generation to the next via DNA, a molecule that encodes genetic information.
DNA is a long biopolymer composed of four types of bases.
The sequence of bases along a particular DNA molecule specifies the genetic information, in a manner similar to a sequence of letters spelling out a sentence.
Before a cell divides, the DNA is copied, so that each of the resulting two cells will inherit the DNA sequence.
Portions of a DNA molecule that specify a single functional unit are called genes; different genes have different sequences of bases.
Within cells, each long strand of DNA is called a chromosome.
The specific location of a DNA sequence within a chromosome is known as a locus.
If the DNA sequence at a locus varies between individuals, the different forms of this sequence are called alleles.
DNA sequences can change through mutations, producing new alleles.
If a mutation occurs within a gene, the new allele may affect the trait that the gene controls, altering the phenotype of the organism.
However, while this simple correspondence between an allele and a trait works in some cases, most traits are influenced by multiple genes in a quantitative or epistatic manner.
Evolution can occur if there is genetic variation within a population.
Variation comes from mutations in the genome, reshuffling of genes through sexual reproduction and migration between populations (gene flow).
Despite the constant introduction of new variation through mutation and gene flow, most of the genome of a species is very similar among all individuals of that species.
However, discoveries in the field of evolutionary developmental biology have demonstrated that even relatively small differences in genotype can lead to dramatic differences in phenotype both within and between species.
An individual organism's phenotype results from both its genotype and the influence of the environment it has lived in.
The modern evolutionary synthesis defines evolution as the change over time in this genetic variation.
The frequency of one particular allele will become more or less prevalent relative to other forms of that gene.
Variation disappears when a new allele reaches the point of fixation—when it either disappears from the population or replaces the ancestral allele entirely.
Mutations are changes in the DNA sequence of a cell's genome and are the ultimate source of genetic variation in all organisms.
When mutations occur, they may alter the product of a gene, or prevent the gene from functioning, or have no effect.
About half of the mutations in the coding regions of protein-coding genes are deleterious — the other half are neutral.
A small percentage of the total mutations in this region confer a fitness benefit.
Some of the mutations in other parts of the genome are deleterious but the vast majority are neutral.
A few are beneficial.
Mutations can involve large sections of a chromosome becoming duplicated (usually by genetic recombination), which can introduce extra copies of a gene into a genome.
Extra copies of genes are a major source of the raw material needed for new genes to evolve.
This is important because most new genes evolve within gene families from pre-existing genes that share common ancestors.
For example, the human eye uses four genes to make structures that sense light: three for colour vision and one for night vision; all four are descended from a single ancestral gene.
New genes can be generated from an ancestral gene when a duplicate copy mutates and acquires a new function.
This process is easier once a gene has been duplicated because it increases the redundancy of the system; one gene in the pair can acquire a new function while the other copy continues to perform its original function.
Other types of mutations can even generate entirely new genes from previously noncoding DNA, a phenomenon termed de novo gene birth.
The generation of new genes can also involve small parts of several genes being duplicated, with these fragments then recombining to form new combinations with new functions (exon shuffling).
When new genes are assembled from shuffling pre-existing parts, domains act as modules with simple independent functions, which can be mixed together to produce new combinations with new and complex functions.
For example, polyketide synthases are large enzymes that make antibiotics; they contain up to 100 independent domains that each catalyse one step in the overall process, like a step in an assembly line.
One example of mutation is wild boar piglets.
They are camouflage coloured and show a characteristic pattern of dark and light longitudinal stripes.
However, mutations in the melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R) disrupt the pattern.
The majority of pig breeds carry MC1R mutations disrupting wild-type colour and different mutations causing dominant black colouring.
In asexual organisms, genes are inherited together, or linked, as they cannot mix with genes of other organisms during reproduction.
In contrast, the offspring of sexual organisms contain random mixtures of their parents' chromosomes that are produced through independent assortment.
In a related process called homologous recombination, sexual organisms exchange DNA between two matching chromosomes.
Recombination and reassortment do not alter allele frequencies, but instead change which alleles are associated with each other, producing offspring with new combinations of alleles.
Sex usually increases genetic variation and may increase the rate of evolution.
The two-fold cost of sex was first described by John Maynard Smith.
The first cost is that in sexually dimorphic species only one of the two sexes can bear young.
This cost does not apply to hermaphroditic species, like most plants and many invertebrates.
The second cost is that any individual who reproduces sexually can only pass on 50% of its genes to any individual offspring, with even less passed on as each new generation passes.
Yet sexual reproduction is the more common means of reproduction among eukaryotes and multicellular organisms.
The Red Queen hypothesis has been used to explain the significance of sexual reproduction as a means to enable continual evolution and adaptation in response to coevolution with other species in an ever-changing environment.
Another hypothesis is that sexual reproduction is primarily an adaptation for promoting accurate recombinational repair of damage in germline DNA, and that increased diversity is a byproduct of this process that may sometimes be adaptively beneficial.
Gene flow is the exchange of genes between populations and between species.
It can therefore be a source of variation that is new to a population or to a species.
Gene flow can be caused by the movement of individuals between separate populations of organisms, as might be caused by the movement of mice between inland and coastal populations, or the movement of pollen between heavy-metal-tolerant and heavy-metal-sensitive populations of grasses.
Gene transfer between species includes the formation of hybrid organisms and horizontal gene transfer.
Horizontal gene transfer is the transfer of genetic material from one organism to another organism that is not its offspring; this is most common among bacteria.
In medicine, this contributes to the spread of antibiotic resistance, as when one bacteria acquires resistance genes it can rapidly transfer them to other species.
Horizontal transfer of genes from bacteria to eukaryotes such as the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the adzuki bean weevil Callosobruchus chinensis has occurred.
An example of larger-scale transfers are the eukaryotic bdelloid rotifers, which have received a range of genes from bacteria, fungi and plants.
Viruses can also carry DNA between organisms, allowing transfer of genes even across biological domains.
Large-scale gene transfer has also occurred between the ancestors of eukaryotic cells and bacteria, during the acquisition of chloroplasts and mitochondria.
It is possible that eukaryotes themselves originated from horizontal gene transfers between bacteria and archaea.
Some heritable changes cannot be explained by changes to the sequence of nucleotides in the DNA.
These phenomena are classed as epigenetic inheritance systems.
DNA methylation marking chromatin, self-sustaining metabolic loops, gene silencing by RNA interference and the three-dimensional conformation of proteins (such as prions) are areas where epigenetic inheritance systems have been discovered at the organismic level.
Developmental biologists suggest that complex interactions in genetic networks and communication among cells can lead to heritable variations that may underlay some of the mechanics in developmental plasticity and canalisation.
Heritability may also occur at even larger scales.
For example, ecological inheritance through the process of niche construction is defined by the regular and repeated activities of organisms in their environment.
This generates a legacy of effects that modify and feed back into the selection regime of subsequent generations.
Other examples of heritability in evolution that are not under the direct control of genes include the inheritance of cultural traits and symbiogenesis.
From a neo-Darwinian perspective, evolution occurs when there are changes in the frequencies of alleles within a population of interbreeding organisms, for example, the allele for black colour in a population of moths becoming more common.
Mechanisms that can lead to changes in allele frequencies include natural selection, genetic drift, and mutation bias.
Evolution by natural selection is the process by which traits that enhance survival and reproduction become more common in successive generations of a population.
Variation exists within populations of organisms with respect to morphology, physiology and behaviour (phenotypic variation).
Different traits confer different rates of survival and reproduction (differential fitness).
These traits can be passed from generation to generation (heritability of fitness).
More offspring are produced than can possibly survive, and these conditions produce competition between organisms for survival and reproduction.
Consequently, organisms with traits that give them an advantage over their competitors are more likely to pass on their traits to the next generation than those with traits that do not confer an advantage.
This teleonomy is the quality whereby the process of natural selection creates and preserves traits that are seemingly fitted for the functional roles they perform.
Consequences of selection include nonrandom mating and genetic hitchhiking.
The central concept of natural selection is the evolutionary fitness of an organism.
Fitness is measured by an organism's ability to survive and reproduce, which determines the size of its genetic contribution to the next generation.
However, fitness is not the same as the total number of offspring: instead fitness is indicated by the proportion of subsequent generations that carry an organism's genes.
For example, if an organism could survive well and reproduce rapidly, but its offspring were all too small and weak to survive, this organism would make little genetic contribution to future generations and would thus have low fitness.
If an allele increases fitness more than the other alleles of that gene, then with each generation this allele has a higher probability of becoming common within the population.
These traits are said to be selected for.
Examples of traits that can increase fitness are enhanced survival and increased fecundity.
Conversely, the lower fitness caused by having a less beneficial or deleterious allele results in this allele likely becoming rarer—they are selected against.
Importantly, the fitness of an allele is not a fixed characteristic; if the environment changes, previously neutral or harmful traits may become beneficial and previously beneficial traits become harmful.
However, even if the direction of selection does reverse in this way, traits that were lost in the past may not re-evolve in an identical form.
However, a re-activation of dormant genes, as long as they have not been eliminated from the genome and were only suppressed perhaps for hundreds of generations, can lead to the re-occurrence of traits thought to be lost like hindlegs in dolphins, teeth in chickens, wings in wingless stick insects, tails and additional nipples in humans etc.
Natural selection within a population for a trait that can vary across a range of values, such as height, can be categorised into three different types.
The first is directional selection, which is a shift in the average value of a trait over time—for example, organisms slowly getting taller.
Secondly, disruptive selection is selection for extreme trait values and often results in two different values becoming most common, with selection against the average value.
This would be when either short or tall organisms had an advantage, but not those of medium height.
Finally, in stabilising selection there is selection against extreme trait values on both ends, which causes a decrease in variance around the average value and less diversity.
This would, for example, cause organisms to eventually have a similar height.
Natural selection most generally makes nature the measure against which individuals and individual traits, are more or less likely to survive.
Eugene Odum, a founder of ecology, defined an ecosystem as: "Any unit that includes all of the organisms.
These relationships involve the life history of the organism, its position in the food chain and its geographic range.
This broad understanding of nature enables scientists to delineate specific forces which, together, comprise natural selection.
Natural selection can act at different levels of organisation, such as genes, cells, individual organisms, groups of organisms and species.
Selection can act at multiple levels simultaneously.
An example of selection occurring below the level of the individual organism are genes called transposons, which can replicate and spread throughout a genome.
Selection at a level above the individual, such as group selection, may allow the evolution of cooperation.
Genetic drift is the random fluctuation of allele frequencies within a population from one generation to the next.
When selective forces are absent or relatively weak, allele frequencies are equally likely to drift upward or downward in each successive generation because the alleles are subject to sampling error.
This drift halts when an allele eventually becomes fixed, either by disappearing from the population or by replacing the other alleles entirely.
Genetic drift may therefore eliminate some alleles from a population due to chance alone.
Even in the absence of selective forces, genetic drift can cause two separate populations that begin with the same genetic structure to drift apart into two divergent populations with different sets of alleles.
According to the neutral theory of molecular evolution most evolutionary changes are the result of the fixation of neutral mutations by genetic drift.
In this model, most genetic changes in a population are thus the result of constant mutation pressure and genetic drift.
This form of the neutral theory has been debated since it does not seem to fit some genetic variation seen in nature.
A better-supported version of this model is the nearly neutral theory, according to which a mutation that would be effectively neutral in a small population is not necessarily neutral in a large population.
Other theories propose that genetic drift is dwarfed by other stochastic forces in evolution, such as genetic hitchhiking, also known as genetic draft.
Another concept is constructive neutral evolution (CNE), which explains that complex systems can emerge and spread into a population through neutral transitions due to the principles of excess capacity, presuppression, and ratcheting, and it has been applied in areas ranging from the origins of the spliceosome to the complex interdependence of microbial communities.
The time it takes a neutral allele to become fixed by genetic drift depends on population size; fixation is more rapid in smaller populations.
The number of individuals in a population is not critical, but instead a measure known as the effective population size.
The effective population is usually smaller than the total population since it takes into account factors such as the level of inbreeding and the stage of the lifecycle in which the population is the smallest.
The effective population size may not be the same for every gene in the same population.
It is usually difficult to measure the relative importance of selection and neutral processes, including drift.
The comparative importance of adaptive and non-adaptive forces in driving evolutionary change is an area of current research.
Mutation bias is usually conceived as a difference in expected rates for two different kinds of mutation, e.
This is related to the idea of developmental bias.
Haldane and Ronald Fisher argued that, because mutation is a weak pressure easily overcome by selection, tendencies of mutation would be ineffectual except under conditions of neutral evolution or extraordinarily high mutation rates.
This opposing-pressures argument was long used to dismiss the possibility of internal tendencies in evolution, until the molecular era prompted renewed interest in neutral evolution.
Noboru Sueoka and Ernst Freese proposed that systematic biases in mutation might be responsible for systematic differences in genomic GC composition between species.
The identification of a GC-biased E.
For instance, mutation biases are frequently invoked in models of codon usage.
Such models also include effects of selection, following the mutation-selection-drift model, which allows both for mutation biases and differential selection based on effects on translation.
Hypotheses of mutation bias have played an important role in the development of thinking about the evolution of genome composition, including isochores.
Different insertion vs.
The hypothesis of Lynch regarding genome size relies on mutational biases toward increase or decrease in genome size.
However, mutational hypotheses for the evolution of composition suffered a reduction in scope when it was discovered that (1) GC-biased gene conversion makes an important contribution to composition in diploid organisms such as mammals and (2) bacterial genomes frequently have AT-biased mutation.
Contemporary thinking about the role of mutation biases reflects a different theory from that of Haldane and Fisher.
More recent work showed that the original "pressures" theory assumes that evolution is based on standing variation: when evolution depends on events of mutation that introduce new alleles, mutational and developmental biases in the introduction of variation (arrival biases) can impose biases on evolution without requiring neutral evolution or high mutation rates.
Several studies report that the mutations implicated in adaptation reflect common mutation biases though others dispute this interpretation.
Recombination allows alleles on the same strand of DNA to become separated.
However, the rate of recombination is low (approximately two events per chromosome per generation).
As a result, genes close together on a chromosome may not always be shuffled away from each other and genes that are close together tend to be inherited together, a phenomenon known as linkage.
This tendency is measured by finding how often two alleles occur together on a single chromosome compared to expectations, which is called their linkage disequilibrium.
A set of alleles that is usually inherited in a group is called a haplotype.
This can be important when one allele in a particular haplotype is strongly beneficial: natural selection can drive a selective sweep that will also cause the other alleles in the haplotype to become more common in the population; this effect is called genetic hitchhiking or genetic draft.
Genetic draft caused by the fact that some neutral genes are genetically linked to others that are under selection can be partially captured by an appropriate effective population size.
A special case of natural selection is sexual selection, which is selection for any trait that increases mating success by increasing the attractiveness of an organism to potential mates.
Traits that evolved through sexual selection are particularly prominent among males of several animal species.
Although sexually favoured, traits such as cumbersome antlers, mating calls, large body size and bright colours often attract predation, which compromises the survival of individual males.
This survival disadvantage is balanced by higher reproductive success in males that show these hard-to-fake, sexually selected traits.
Evolution influences every aspect of the form and behaviour of organisms.
Most prominent are the specific behavioural and physical adaptations that are the outcome of natural selection.
These adaptations increase fitness by aiding activities such as finding food, avoiding predators or attracting mates.
Organisms can also respond to selection by cooperating with each other, usually by aiding their relatives or engaging in mutually beneficial symbiosis.
In the longer term, evolution produces new species through splitting ancestral populations of organisms into new groups that cannot or will not interbreed.
These outcomes of evolution are distinguished based on time scale as macroevolution versus microevolution.
Macroevolution refers to evolution that occurs at or above the level of species, in particular speciation and extinction, whereas microevolution refers to smaller evolutionary changes within a species or population, in particular shifts in allele frequency and adaptation.
Macroevolution is the outcome of long periods of microevolution.
Thus, the distinction between micro- and macroevolution is not a fundamental one—the difference is simply the time involved.
However, in macroevolution, the traits of the entire species may be important.
For instance, a large amount of variation among individuals allows a species to rapidly adapt to new habitats, lessening the chance of it going extinct, while a wide geographic range increases the chance of speciation, by making it more likely that part of the population will become isolated.
In this sense, microevolution and macroevolution might involve selection at different levels—with microevolution acting on genes and organisms, versus macroevolutionary processes such as species selection acting on entire species and affecting their rates of speciation and extinction.
A common misconception is that evolution has goals, long-term plans, or an innate tendency for "progress", as expressed in beliefs such as orthogenesis and evolutionism; realistically, however, evolution has no long-term goal and does not necessarily produce greater complexity.
Although complex species have evolved, they occur as a side effect of the overall number of organisms increasing, and simple forms of life still remain more common in the biosphere.
For example, the overwhelming majority of species are microscopic prokaryotes, which form about half the world's biomass despite their small size and constitute the vast majority of Earth's biodiversity.
Simple organisms have therefore been the dominant form of life on Earth throughout its history and continue to be the main form of life up to the present day, with complex life only appearing more diverse because it is more noticeable.
Indeed, the evolution of microorganisms is particularly important to evolutionary research since their rapid reproduction allows the study of experimental evolution and the observation of evolution and adaptation in real time.
Adaptation is the process that makes organisms better suited to their habitat.
Also, the term adaptation may refer to a trait that is important for an organism's survival.
For example, the adaptation of horses' teeth to the grinding of grass.
By using the term adaptation for the evolutionary process and adaptive trait for the product (the bodily part or function), the two senses of the word may be distinguished.
Adaptations are produced by natural selection.
Adaptation is the evolutionary process whereby an organism becomes better able to live in its habitat or habitats.
Adaptedness is the state of being adapted: the degree to which an organism is able to live and reproduce in a given set of habitats.
An adaptive trait is an aspect of the developmental pattern of the organism which enables or enhances the probability of that organism surviving and reproducing.
Adaptation may cause either the gain of a new feature, or the loss of an ancestral feature.
An example that shows both types of change is bacterial adaptation to antibiotic selection, with genetic changes causing antibiotic resistance by both modifying the target of the drug, or increasing the activity of transporters that pump the drug out of the cell.
Other striking examples are the bacteria Escherichia coli evolving the ability to use citric acid as a nutrient in a long-term laboratory experiment, Flavobacterium evolving a novel enzyme that allows these bacteria to grow on the by-products of nylon manufacturing, and the soil bacterium Sphingobium evolving an entirely new metabolic pathway that degrades the synthetic pesticide pentachlorophenol.
An interesting but still controversial idea is that some adaptations might increase the ability of organisms to generate genetic diversity and adapt by natural selection (increasing organisms' evolvability).
Adaptation occurs through the gradual modification of existing structures.
Consequently, structures with similar internal organisation may have different functions in related organisms.
This is the result of a single ancestral structure being adapted to function in different ways.
The bones within bat wings, for example, are very similar to those in mice feet and primate hands, due to the descent of all these structures from a common mammalian ancestor.
However, since all living organisms are related to some extent, even organs that appear to have little or no structural similarity, such as arthropod, squid and vertebrate eyes, or the limbs and wings of arthropods and vertebrates, can depend on a common set of homologous genes that control their assembly and function; this is called deep homology.
During evolution, some structures may lose their original function and become vestigial structures.
Such structures may have little or no function in a current species, yet have a clear function in ancestral species, or other closely related species.
Examples include pseudogenes, the non-functional remains of eyes in blind cave-dwelling fish, wings in flightless birds, the presence of hip bones in whales and snakes, and sexual traits in organisms that reproduce via asexual reproduction.
Examples of vestigial structures in humans include wisdom teeth, the coccyx, the vermiform appendix, and other behavioural vestiges such as goose bumps and primitive reflexes.
However, many traits that appear to be simple adaptations are in fact exaptations: structures originally adapted for one function, but which coincidentally became somewhat useful for some other function in the process.
One example is the African lizard Holaspis guentheri, which developed an extremely flat head for hiding in crevices, as can be seen by looking at its near relatives.
However, in this species, the head has become so flattened that it assists in gliding from tree to tree—an exaptation.
Within cells, molecular machines such as the bacterial flagella and protein sorting machinery evolved by the recruitment of several pre-existing proteins that previously had different functions.
Another example is the recruitment of enzymes from glycolysis and xenobiotic metabolism to serve as structural proteins called crystallins within the lenses of organisms' eyes.
An area of current investigation in evolutionary developmental biology is the developmental basis of adaptations and exaptations.
This research addresses the origin and evolution of embryonic development and how modifications of development and developmental processes produce novel features.
These studies have shown that evolution can alter development to produce new structures, such as embryonic bone structures that develop into the jaw in other animals instead forming part of the middle ear in mammals.
It is also possible for structures that have been lost in evolution to reappear due to changes in developmental genes, such as a mutation in chickens causing embryos to grow teeth similar to those of crocodiles.
It is now becoming clear that most alterations in the form of organisms are due to changes in a small set of conserved genes.
Interactions between organisms can produce both conflict and cooperation.
When the interaction is between pairs of species, such as a pathogen and a host, or a predator and its prey, these species can develop matched sets of adaptations.
Here, the evolution of one species causes adaptations in a second species.
These changes in the second species then, in turn, cause new adaptations in the first species.
This cycle of selection and response is called coevolution.
An example is the production of tetrodotoxin in the rough-skinned newt and the evolution of tetrodotoxin resistance in its predator, the common garter snake.
In this predator-prey pair, an evolutionary arms race has produced high levels of toxin in the newt and correspondingly high levels of toxin resistance in the snake.
Not all co-evolved interactions between species involve conflict.
Many cases of mutually beneficial interactions have evolved.
For instance, an extreme cooperation exists between plants and the mycorrhizal fungi that grow on their roots and aid the plant in absorbing nutrients from the soil.
This is a reciprocal relationship as the plants provide the fungi with sugars from photosynthesis.
Here, the fungi actually grow inside plant cells, allowing them to exchange nutrients with their hosts, while sending signals that suppress the plant immune system.
Coalitions between organisms of the same species have also evolved.
An extreme case is the eusociality found in social insects, such as bees, termites and ants, where sterile insects feed and guard the small number of organisms in a colony that are able to reproduce.
On an even smaller scale, the somatic cells that make up the body of an animal limit their reproduction so they can maintain a stable organism, which then supports a small number of the animal's germ cells to produce offspring.
Here, somatic cells respond to specific signals that instruct them whether to grow, remain as they are, or die.
If cells ignore these signals and multiply inappropriately, their uncontrolled growth causes cancer.
Such cooperation within species may have evolved through the process of kin selection, which is where one organism acts to help raise a relative's offspring.
This activity is selected for because if the helping individual contains alleles which promote the helping activity, it is likely that its kin will also contain these alleles and thus those alleles will be passed on.
Other processes that may promote cooperation include group selection, where cooperation provides benefits to a group of organisms.
Speciation is the process where a species diverges into two or more descendant species.
There are multiple ways to define the concept of "species".
The choice of definition is dependent on the particularities of the species concerned.
For example, some species concepts apply more readily toward sexually reproducing organisms while others lend themselves better toward asexual organisms.
Despite the diversity of various species concepts, these various concepts can be placed into one of three broad philosophical approaches: interbreeding, ecological and phylogenetic.
The Biological Species Concept (BSC) is a classic example of the interbreeding approach.
Defined by evolutionary biologist Ernst Mayr in 1942, the BSC states that "species are groups of actually or potentially interbreeding natural populations, which are reproductively isolated from other such groups.
Some researchers have attempted a unifying monistic definition of species, while others adopt a pluralistic approach and suggest that there may be different ways to logically interpret the definition of a species.
Barriers to reproduction between two diverging sexual populations are required for the populations to become new species.
Gene flow may slow this process by spreading the new genetic variants also to the other populations.
Depending on how far two species have diverged since their most recent common ancestor, it may still be possible for them to produce offspring, as with horses and donkeys mating to produce mules.
Such hybrids are generally infertile.
In this case, closely related species may regularly interbreed, but hybrids will be selected against and the species will remain distinct.
However, viable hybrids are occasionally formed and these new species can either have properties intermediate between their parent species, or possess a totally new phenotype.
The importance of hybridisation in producing new species of animals is unclear, although cases have been seen in many types of animals, with the grey tree frog being a particularly well-studied example.
Speciation has been observed multiple times under both controlled laboratory conditions and in nature.
In sexually reproducing organisms, speciation results from reproductive isolation followed by genealogical divergence.
There are four primary geographic modes of speciation.
The most common in animals is allopatric speciation, which occurs in populations initially isolated geographically, such as by habitat fragmentation or migration.
Selection under these conditions can produce very rapid changes in the appearance and behaviour of organisms.
As selection and drift act independently on populations isolated from the rest of their species, separation may eventually produce organisms that cannot interbreed.
The second mode of speciation is peripatric speciation, which occurs when small populations of organisms become isolated in a new environment.
This differs from allopatric speciation in that the isolated populations are numerically much smaller than the parental population.
Here, the founder effect causes rapid speciation after an increase in inbreeding increases selection on homozygotes, leading to rapid genetic change.
The third mode is parapatric speciation.
This is similar to peripatric speciation in that a small population enters a new habitat, but differs in that there is no physical separation between these two populations.
Instead, speciation results from the evolution of mechanisms that reduce gene flow between the two populations.
Generally this occurs when there has been a drastic change in the environment within the parental species' habitat.
One example is the grass Anthoxanthum odoratum, which can undergo parapatric speciation in response to localised metal pollution from mines.
Here, plants evolve that have resistance to high levels of metals in the soil.
Selection against interbreeding with the metal-sensitive parental population produced a gradual change in the flowering time of the metal-resistant plants, which eventually produced complete reproductive isolation.
Selection against hybrids between the two populations may cause reinforcement, which is the evolution of traits that promote mating within a species, as well as character displacement, which is when two species become more distinct in appearance.
Finally, in sympatric speciation species diverge without geographic isolation or changes in habitat.
This form is rare since even a small amount of gene flow may remove genetic differences between parts of a population.
Generally, sympatric speciation in animals requires the evolution of both genetic differences and nonrandom mating, to allow reproductive isolation to evolve.
One type of sympatric speciation involves crossbreeding of two related species to produce a new hybrid species.
This is not common in animals as animal hybrids are usually sterile.
This is because during meiosis the homologous chromosomes from each parent are from different species and cannot successfully pair.
However, it is more common in plants because plants often double their number of chromosomes, to form polyploids.
This allows the chromosomes from each parental species to form matching pairs during meiosis, since each parent's chromosomes are represented by a pair already.
An example of such a speciation event is when the plant species Arabidopsis thaliana and Arabidopsis arenosa crossbred to give the new species Arabidopsis suecica.
This happened about 20,000 years ago, and the speciation process has been repeated in the laboratory, which allows the study of the genetic mechanisms involved in this process.
Indeed, chromosome doubling within a species may be a common cause of reproductive isolation, as half the doubled chromosomes will be unmatched when breeding with undoubled organisms.
Speciation events are important in the theory of punctuated equilibrium, which accounts for the pattern in the fossil record of short "bursts" of evolution interspersed with relatively long periods of stasis, where species remain relatively unchanged.
In this theory, speciation and rapid evolution are linked, with natural selection and genetic drift acting most strongly on organisms undergoing speciation in novel habitats or small populations.
As a result, the periods of stasis in the fossil record correspond to the parental population and the organisms undergoing speciation and rapid evolution are found in small populations or geographically restricted habitats and therefore rarely being preserved as fossils.
Extinction is the disappearance of an entire species.
Extinction is not an unusual event, as species regularly appear through speciation and disappear through extinction.
Nearly all animal and plant species that have lived on Earth are now extinct, and extinction appears to be the ultimate fate of all species.
These extinctions have happened continuously throughout the history of life, although the rate of extinction spikes in occasional mass extinction events.
The Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event, during which the non-avian dinosaurs became extinct, is the most well-known, but the earlier Permian–Triassic extinction event was even more severe, with approximately 96% of all marine species driven to extinction.
The Holocene extinction event is an ongoing mass extinction associated with humanity's expansion across the globe over the past few thousand years.
Present-day extinction rates are 100–1000 times greater than the background rate and up to 30% of current species may be extinct by the mid 21st century.
Human activities are now the primary cause of the ongoing extinction event; global warming may further accelerate it in the future.
Despite the estimated extinction of more than 99% of all species that ever lived on Earth, about 1 trillion species are estimated to be on Earth currently with only one-thousandth of 1% described.
The role of extinction in evolution is not very well understood and may depend on which type of extinction is considered.
The causes of the continuous "low-level" extinction events, which form the majority of extinctions, may be the result of competition between species for limited resources (the competitive exclusion principle).
If one species can out-compete another, this could produce species selection, with the fitter species surviving and the other species being driven to extinction.
The intermittent mass extinctions are also important, but instead of acting as a selective force, they drastically reduce diversity in a nonspecific manner and promote bursts of rapid evolution and speciation in survivors.
Concepts and models used in evolutionary biology, such as natural selection, have many applications.
Artificial selection is the intentional selection of traits in a population of organisms.
This has been used for thousands of years in the domestication of plants and animals.
More recently, such selection has become a vital part of genetic engineering, with selectable markers such as antibiotic resistance genes being used to manipulate DNA.
Proteins with valuable properties have evolved by repeated rounds of mutation and selection (for example modified enzymes and new antibodies) in a process called directed evolution.
Understanding the changes that have occurred during an organism's evolution can reveal the genes needed to construct parts of the body, genes which may be involved in human genetic disorders.
For example, the Mexican tetra is an albino cavefish that lost its eyesight during evolution.
Breeding together different populations of this blind fish produced some offspring with functional eyes, since different mutations had occurred in the isolated populations that had evolved in different caves.
This helped identify genes required for vision and pigmentation.
Evolutionary theory has many applications in medicine.
Many human diseases are not static phenomena, but capable of evolution.
Viruses, bacteria, fungi and cancers evolve to be resistant to host immune defences, as well as to pharmaceutical drugs.
These same problems occur in agriculture with pesticide and herbicide resistance.
It is possible that we are facing the end of the effective life of most of available antibiotics and predicting the evolution and evolvability of our pathogens and devising strategies to slow or circumvent it is requiring deeper knowledge of the complex forces driving evolution at the molecular level.
In computer science, simulations of evolution using evolutionary algorithms and artificial life started in the 1960s and were extended with simulation of artificial selection.
Artificial evolution became a widely recognised optimisation method as a result of the work of Ingo Rechenberg in the 1960s.
He used evolution strategies to solve complex engineering problems.
Genetic algorithms in particular became popular through the writing of John Henry Holland.
Practical applications also include automatic evolution of computer programmes.
Evolutionary algorithms are now used to solve multi-dimensional problems more efficiently than software produced by human designers and also to optimise the design of systems.
The Earth is about 4.
The earliest undisputed evidence of life on Earth dates from at least 3.
Microbial mat fossils have been found in 3.
Other early physical evidence of a biogenic substance is graphite in 3.
Commenting on the Australian findings, Stephen Blair Hedges wrote: "If life arose relatively quickly on Earth, then it could be common in the universe.
More than 99% of all species, amounting to over five billion species, that ever lived on Earth are estimated to be extinct.
Estimates on the number of Earth's current species range from 10 million to 14 million, of which about 1.
Highly energetic chemistry is thought to have produced a self-replicating molecule around 4 billion years ago, and half a billion years later the last common ancestor of all life existed.
The current scientific consensus is that the complex biochemistry that makes up life came from simpler chemical reactions.
The beginning of life may have included self-replicating molecules such as RNA and the assembly of simple cells.
All organisms on Earth are descended from a common ancestor or ancestral gene pool.
Current species are a stage in the process of evolution, with their diversity the product of a long series of speciation and extinction events.
The common descent of organisms was first deduced from four simple facts about organisms: First, they have geographic distributions that cannot be explained by local adaptation.
Second, the diversity of life is not a set of completely unique organisms, but organisms that share morphological similarities.
Third, vestigial traits with no clear purpose resemble functional ancestral traits.
Fourth, organisms can be classified using these similarities into a hierarchy of nested groups, similar to a family tree.
Due to horizontal gene transfer, this "tree of life" may be more complicated than a simple branching tree, since some genes have spread independently between distantly related species.
To solve this problem and others, some authors prefer to use the "Coral of life" as a metaphor or a mathematical model to illustrate the evolution of life.
This view dates back to an idea briefly mentioned by Darwin but later abandoned.
Past species have also left records of their evolutionary history.
Fossils, along with the comparative anatomy of present-day organisms, constitute the morphological, or anatomical, record.
By comparing the anatomies of both modern and extinct species, palaeontologists can infer the lineages of those species.
However, this approach is most successful for organisms that had hard body parts, such as shells, bones or teeth.
Further, as prokaryotes such as bacteria and archaea share a limited set of common morphologies, their fossils do not provide information on their ancestry.
More recently, evidence for common descent has come from the study of biochemical similarities between organisms.
For example, all living cells use the same basic set of nucleotides and amino acids.
The development of molecular genetics has revealed the record of evolution left in organisms' genomes: dating when species diverged through the molecular clock produced by mutations.
For example, these DNA sequence comparisons have revealed that humans and chimpanzees share 98% of their genomes and analysing the few areas where they differ helps shed light on when the common ancestor of these species existed.
Prokaryotes inhabited the Earth from approximately 3–4 billion years ago.
No obvious changes in morphology or cellular organisation occurred in these organisms over the next few billion years.
The eukaryotic cells emerged between 1.
The next major change in cell structure came when bacteria were engulfed by eukaryotic cells, in a cooperative association called endosymbiosis.
The engulfed bacteria and the host cell then underwent coevolution, with the bacteria evolving into either mitochondria or hydrogenosomes.
Another engulfment of cyanobacterial-like organisms led to the formation of chloroplasts in algae and plants.
The history of life was that of the unicellular eukaryotes, prokaryotes and archaea until around 1.
The evolution of multicellularity occurred in multiple independent events, in organisms as diverse as sponges, brown algae, cyanobacteria, slime moulds and myxobacteria.
In January 2016, scientists reported that, about 800 million years ago, a minor genetic change in a single molecule called GK-PID may have allowed organisms to go from a single cell organism to one of many cells.
Here, the majority of types of modern animals appeared in the fossil record, as well as unique lineages that subsequently became extinct.
Various triggers for the Cambrian explosion have been proposed, including the accumulation of oxygen in the atmosphere from photosynthesis.
About 500 million years ago, plants and fungi colonised the land and were soon followed by arthropods and other animals.
Insects were particularly successful and even today make up the majority of animal species.
Amphibians first appeared around 364 million years ago, followed by early amniotes and birds around 155 million years ago (both from "reptile"-like lineages), mammals around 129 million years ago, Homininae around 10 million years ago and modern humans around 250,000 years ago.
However, despite the evolution of these large animals, smaller organisms similar to the types that evolved early in this process continue to be highly successful and dominate the Earth, with the majority of both biomass and species being prokaryotes.
The proposal that one type of organism could descend from another type goes back to some of the first pre-Socratic Greek philosophers, such as Anaximander and Empedocles.
Such proposals survived into Roman times.
The poet and philosopher Lucretius followed Empedocles in his masterwork De rerum natura (lit.
In contrast to these materialistic views, Aristotelianism had considered all natural things as actualisations of fixed natural possibilities, known as forms.
This became part of a medieval teleological understanding of nature in which all things have an intended role to play in a divine cosmic order.
Variations of this idea became the standard understanding of the Middle Ages and were integrated into Christian learning, but Aristotle did not demand that real types of organisms always correspond one-for-one with exact metaphysical forms and specifically gave examples of how new types of living things could come to be.
A number of Arab Muslim scholars wrote about evolution, most notably Ibn Khaldun, who wrote the book Muqaddimah in 1377, in which he asserted that humans developed from "the world of the monkeys", in a process by which "species become more numerous".
The Scientific Revolution ("New Science") of the 17th century rejected the Aristotelian approach.
It sought to explain natural phenomena in terms of physical laws that were the same for all visible things and that did not require the existence of any fixed natural categories or divine cosmic order.
However, this new approach was slow to take root in the biological sciences: the last bastion of the concept of fixed natural types.
John Ray applied one of the previously more general terms for fixed natural types, "species", to plant and animal types, but he strictly identified each type of living thing as a species and proposed that each species could be defined by the features that perpetuated themselves generation after generation.
The biological classification introduced by Carl Linnaeus in 1735 explicitly recognised the hierarchical nature of species relationships, but still viewed species as fixed according to a divine plan.
Other naturalists of this time speculated on the evolutionary change of species over time according to natural laws.
In 1751, Pierre Louis Maupertuis wrote of natural modifications occurring during reproduction and accumulating over many generations to produce new species.
Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon, suggested that species could degenerate into different organisms, and Erasmus Darwin proposed that all warm-blooded animals could have descended from a single microorganism (or "filament").
The first full-fledged evolutionary scheme was Jean-Baptiste Lamarck's "transmutation" theory of 1809, which envisaged spontaneous generation continually producing simple forms of life that developed greater complexity in parallel lineages with an inherent progressive tendency, and postulated that on a local level, these lineages adapted to the environment by inheriting changes caused by their use or disuse in parents.
In particular, Georges Cuvier insisted that species were unrelated and fixed, their similarities reflecting divine design for functional needs.
In the meantime, Ray's ideas of benevolent design had been developed by William Paley into the Natural Theology or Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity (1802), which proposed complex adaptations as evidence of divine design and which was admired by Charles Darwin.
The crucial break from the concept of constant typological classes or types in biology came with the theory of evolution through natural selection, which was formulated by Charles Darwin and Alfred Wallace in terms of variable populations.
Darwin used the expression descent with modification rather than evolution.
Partly influenced by An Essay on the Principle of Population (1798) by Thomas Robert Malthus, Darwin noted that population growth would lead to a "struggle for existence" in which favourable variations prevailed as others perished.
In each generation, many offspring fail to survive to an age of reproduction because of limited resources.
This could explain the diversity of plants and animals from a common ancestry through the working of natural laws in the same way for all types of organism.
Darwin developed his theory of "natural selection" from 1838 onwards and was writing up his "big book" on the subject when Alfred Russel Wallace sent him a version of virtually the same theory in 1858.
Their separate papers were presented together at an 1858 meeting of the Linnean Society of London.
At the end of 1859, Darwin's publication of his "abstract" as On the Origin of Species explained natural selection in detail and in a way that led to an increasingly wide acceptance of Darwin's concepts of evolution at the expense of alternative theories.
Thomas Henry Huxley applied Darwin's ideas to humans, using palaeontology and comparative anatomy to provide strong evidence that humans and apes shared a common ancestry.
Some were disturbed by this since it implied that humans did not have a special place in the universe.
Marsh, America's first palaeontologist, was the first to provide solid fossil evidence to support Darwin's theory of evolution by unearthing the ancestors of the modern horse.
In 1877, Marsh delivered a very influential speech before the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, providing a demonstrative argument for evolution.
For the first time, Marsh traced the evolution of vertebrates from fish all the way through humans.
Sparing no detail, he listed a wealth of fossil examples of past life forms.
The significance of this speech was immediately recognised by the scientific community, and it was printed in its entirety in several scientific journals.
In 1880, Marsh caught the attention of the scientific world with the publication of Odontornithes: a Monograph on Extinct Birds of North America, which included his discoveries of birds with teeth.
These skeletons helped bridge the gap between dinosaurs and birds, and provided invaluable support for Darwin's theory of evolution.
Darwin wrote to Marsh saying, "Your work on these old birds & on the many fossil animals of N.
America has afforded the best support to the theory of evolution, which has appeared within the last 20 years" (since Darwin's publication of Origin of Species).
The mechanisms of reproductive heritability and the origin of new traits remained a mystery.
Towards this end, Darwin developed his provisional theory of pangenesis.
In 1865, Gregor Mendel reported that traits were inherited in a predictable manner through the independent assortment and segregation of elements (later known as genes).
Mendel's laws of inheritance eventually supplanted most of Darwin's pangenesis theory.
August Weismann made the important distinction between germ cells that give rise to gametes (such as sperm and egg cells) and the somatic cells of the body, demonstrating that heredity passes through the germ line only.
Hugo de Vries connected Darwin's pangenesis theory to Weismann's germ/soma cell distinction and proposed that Darwin's pangenes were concentrated in the cell nucleus and when expressed they could move into the cytoplasm to change the cell's structure.
De Vries was also one of the researchers who made Mendel's work well known, believing that Mendelian traits corresponded to the transfer of heritable variations along the germline.
To explain how new variants originate, de Vries developed a mutation theory that led to a temporary rift between those who accepted Darwinian evolution and biometricians who allied with de Vries.
In the 1930s, pioneers in the field of population genetics, such as Ronald Fisher, Sewall Wright and J.
Haldane set the foundations of evolution onto a robust statistical philosophy.
The false contradiction between Darwin's theory, genetic mutations, and Mendelian inheritance was thus reconciled.
In the 1920s and 1930s, the modern synthesis connected natural selection and population genetics, based on Mendelian inheritance, into a unified theory that included random genetic drift, mutation, and gene flow.
This new version of evolutionary theory focused on changes in allele frequencies in population.
It explained patterns observed across species in populations, through fossil transitions in palaeontology.
Since then, further syntheses have extended evolution's explanatory power in the light of numerous discoveries, to cover biological phenomena across the whole of the biological hierarchy from genes to populations.
The publication of the structure of DNA by James Watson and Francis Crick with contribution of Rosalind Franklin in 1953 demonstrated a physical mechanism for inheritance.
Molecular biology improved understanding of the relationship between genotype and phenotype.
Advances were also made in phylogenetic systematics, mapping the transition of traits into a comparative and testable framework through the publication and use of evolutionary trees.
In 1973, evolutionary biologist Theodosius Dobzhansky penned that "nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution", because it has brought to light the relations of what first seemed disjointed facts in natural history into a coherent explanatory body of knowledge that describes and predicts many observable facts about life on this planet.
One extension, known as evolutionary developmental biology and informally called "evo-devo", emphasises how changes between generations (evolution) act on patterns of change within individual organisms (development).
Since the beginning of the 21st century, some biologists have argued for an extended evolutionary synthesis, which would account for the effects of non-genetic inheritance modes, such as epigenetics, parental effects, ecological inheritance and cultural inheritance, and evolvability.
In the 19th century, particularly after the publication of On the Origin of Species in 1859, the idea that life had evolved was an active source of academic debate centred on the philosophical, social and religious implications of evolution.
Today, the modern evolutionary synthesis is accepted by a vast majority of scientists.
However, evolution remains a contentious concept for some theists.
While various religions and denominations have reconciled their beliefs with evolution through concepts such as theistic evolution, there are creationists who believe that evolution is contradicted by the creation myths found in their religions and who raise various objections to evolution.
As had been demonstrated by responses to the publication of Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation in 1844, the most controversial aspect of evolutionary biology is the implication of human evolution that humans share common ancestry with apes and that the mental and moral faculties of humanity have the same types of natural causes as other inherited traits in animals.
In some countries, notably the United States, these tensions between science and religion have fuelled the current creation–evolution controversy, a religious conflict focusing on politics and public education.
While other scientific fields such as cosmology and Earth science also conflict with literal interpretations of many religious texts, evolutionary biology experiences significantly more opposition from religious literalists.
The teaching of evolution in American secondary school biology classes was uncommon in most of the first half of the 20th century.
The Scopes trial decision of 1925 caused the subject to become very rare in American secondary biology textbooks for a generation, but it was gradually re-introduced later and became legally protected with the 1968 Epperson v.
Since then, the competing religious belief of creationism was legally disallowed in secondary school curricula in various decisions in the 1970s and 1980s, but it returned in pseudoscientific form as intelligent design (ID), to be excluded once again in the 2005 Kitzmiller v.
Dover Area School District case.
The debate over Darwin's ideas did not generate significant controversy in China.
Retrieved 30 May 2011.
Berkeley, California: University of California, Berkeley.
Retrieved 30 May 2011.
Arlington County, Virginia: National Science Foundation.
Archived from the original on 19 May 2011.
Retrieved 30 May 2011.
Smithsonian Institution, National Museum of Natural History.
Retrieved 14 July 2018.
Adobe Flash required.
Retrieved 2021-08-24.
East Lansing, Michigan: Michigan State University.
Retrieved 31 July 2013.
Chastain, Erick; Livnat, Adi; Papadimitriou, Christos; Vazirani, Umesh (22 July 2014).
Harvard Online Learning.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University.
Archived from the original on 18 December 2017.
Retrieved 15 July 2018.
New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University.
Archived from the original on 1 December 2017.
Retrieved 14 July 2018.
An atmosphere is a layer of gases that envelop an astronomical object, held in place by the gravity of the object.
The name originates from Ancient Greek ἀτμός (atmós) 'vapour, steam' and σφαῖρα (sphaîra) 'sphere'.
An object acquires most of its atmosphere during its primordial epoch, either by accretion of matter or by outgassing of volatiles.
The chemical interaction of the atmosphere with the solid surface can change its fundamental composition, as can photochemical interaction with the Sun.
A planet retains an atmosphere for longer durations when the gravity is high and the temperature is low.
The solar wind works to strip away a planet's outer atmosphere, although this process is slowed by a magnetosphere.
The further a body is from the Sun, the lower the rate of atmospheric stripping.
Aside from Mercury, all Solar System planets have substantial atmospheres, as does the dwarf planet Pluto and the moon Titan.
The high gravity and low temperature of Jupiter and the other gas giant planets allow them to retain massive atmospheres of mostly hydrogen and helium.
Lower mass terrestrial planets orbit closer to the Sun, and so mainly retain higher molar mass atmospheres made of carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen, with trace amounts of inert gas.
Atmospheres have been detected around exoplanets such as HD 209458 b and Kepler-7b.
A stellar atmosphere is the outer region of a star, which includes the layers above the opaque photosphere; stars of low temperature might have outer atmospheres containing compound molecules.
Other objects with atmospheres are brown dwarfs and active comets.
In the nebular hypothesis, stars form during the gravitational collapse of a mass of gas and dust within an interstellar molecular cloud.
This material forms a pancake-like rotating disk with the mass concentrated at the center.
The protostar is created at the central mass concentration, while the planets and satellites are formed in the disk through a process of accretion.
Dust settles into the median disk plane, forming materials that can collide and accrete to create planetesimals.
Close to the star, these bodies grow and accumulate to form protoplanets consisting primarily of refractory materials with few volatiles.
Further from the star, planetary embryos are created from accumulation of volatiles up to around ten times the mass of the Earth or more.
Masses of gas are then acquired from the surrounding disk nebula, forming a gas giant around the embryo.
Planetary satellites form in a similar fashion from the disk of material around the planets.
The primary atmosphere of a planet is produced when the gravity is sufficient to retain accreted gas against escape processes.
The latter can include collisions with other bodies that impart sufficient energy for the gasses to escape.
For the terrestrial planets, the high temperatures generated by their initial bombardment results in the outgassing of volatiles, creating the secondary atmosphere.
The original composition and thickness of the atmosphere is thus determined by the stellar nebula's chemistry and temperature, but can be modified by processes within the astronomical body that release different atmospheric components.
The circumstellar disk will finally dissipate on time scales of about 107 years, and the star will complete its contraction then ignite hydrogen fusion at its core in a time frame determined by its mass.
The atmospheres of the planets Venus and Mars are principally composed of carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and argon.
Because Venus has no oceans or rain to dissolve the carbon dioxide, large amounts of this greenhouse gas has remained in the atmosphere.
The result is a dense atmosphere about 80 times the pressure of Earth's atmosphere.
The planet's lack of a magnetic field and closer proximity to the Sun resulted in the loss of its hydrogen (in the form of water) after two billion years.
Because Mars is small, cold, and lacks a magnetic field, it has retained only a sparse atmosphere.
The surface air pressure of 0.
The planet has probably lost at least 80–85% of its original water supply to space.
However, the planet has retained significant deposits of frozen water and carbon dioxide.
If all of the frozen CO2 were to sublimate, the air pressure could climb to 30 kPa.
This is comparable to the air pressure on the top of Mount Everest.
The composition of Earth's atmosphere is determined by the by-products of the life that it sustains.
Dry air (mixture of gases) from Earth's atmosphere contains 78.
Earth's persistent magnetosphere acts as a shield against atmospheric scavenging by the solar wind, as it fends off the incoming plasma at a distance of about 10 Earth radii.
The low temperatures and higher escape velocities of the Solar System's giant planets—Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune—allow them more readily to retain gases with low molecular masses.
These planets have reducing atmospheres of hydrogen and helium, with trace amounts of other elements and more complex compounds.
Unlike the terrestrial planets, the gas giants lack a well-defined surface.
Instead the atmosphere is maintained in hydrostatic equilibrium by intense pressure deep in the body.
The dynamic weather on these bodies only occurs in a relatively thin surface layer.
Two satellites of the outer planets possess significant atmospheres.
Titan, a moon of Saturn, and Triton, a moon of Neptune, have atmospheres mainly of nitrogen.
When in the part of its orbit closest to the Sun, Pluto has an atmosphere of nitrogen and methane similar to Triton's, but these gases are frozen when it is farther from the Sun.
Other bodies within the Solar System have extremely thin atmospheres not in equilibrium.
These include the Moon (sodium gas, noble gases, hydrogen), Mercury (sodium gas), Callisto (carbon dioxide and oxygen), Europa (oxygen), Io (sulfur dioxide), and Enceladus (water vapor).
Planetary objects around distant stars, known as exoplanets, span a more diverse range of physical properties than is found in the Solar System.
These targets provide an opportunity to study atmospheres around a broad span of objects and conditions.
However, observations of these targets requires much more sensitive instrumentation.
The methods used to analyze these remote atmospheres are transit spectroscopy, high-resolution Doppler spectroscopy, and direct imaging.
Transit spectroscopy uses the transit of an exoplanet across its host star to detect its atmosphere.
By comparing the radius at different wavelengths, the presence of specific components can be detected.
The first such detection was in 2002, when sodium was detected in the atmosphere of HD 209458b, a gas giant with a close orbit around a star in the constellation Pegasus.
Its atmosphere is heated to temperatures over 1,000 K, and is steadily escaping into space.
Hydrogen, oxygen, and carbon have been detected in the planet's inflated atmosphere by Hubble observations.
Since 2002, potassium has been detected in the atmosphere of XO-2Nb, and both sodium and potassium in HD 189733 b's atmosphere.
Many of the discovered super earths have orbits close enough to their host star that their surfaces are expected to be magma oceans.
The secondary atmospheres of these lava planets most likely consist of materials that have been vaporized from the magma, such as sodium, potassium, oxygen, and silicon oxide.
An atmosphere in hydrostatic equilibrium consists of a balance between the air pressure created by the motions of the molecules, and the restraining force of gravity that prevents the molecules from escaping.
The pressure decreases in altitude, producing a pressure-gradient force.
Atmospheric pressure is the force (per unit-area) perpendicular to a unit-area of planetary surface, as determined by the weight of the vertical column of atmospheric gases.
In said atmospheric model, the atmospheric pressure, the weight of the mass of the gas, decreases at high altitude because of the diminishing mass of the gas above the point of barometric measurement.
Air pressure varies by place and time due to meteorological conditions and atmospheric waves.
Units of air pressure are based upon the standard atmosphere (atm), which is 101,325 Pa (equivalent to 760 Torr or 14.
For an ideal gas atmosphere, the height at which the atmospheric pressure declines by a factor of e (the base of the natural logarithm) is called the scale height (H).
For an atmosphere of uniform temperature, the scale height is proportional to the atmospheric temperature and is inversely proportional to the product of the mean molecular mass of dry air, and the local acceleration of gravity at the point of barometric measurement.
The temperature of the atmosphere is determined by an energy budget, which balances the heating from the incoming solar energy against the heat radiated back into space.
The incoming energy is determined by the distance from the Sun, and the energy reflected back out by the planetary albedo.
When a planet is in radiative equilibrium, it has a planetary equilibrium temperature.
This differs from the global mean temperature, which may be warmer than the equilibrium temperature due to the atmospheric greenhouse effect.
For example, Venus has a surface temperature of almost 460 C compared to an equilibrium temperature of −40 C.
Planetary atmospheres are composed of layers with different properties, such as specific gaseous composition, temperature gradients, and pressure.
For Earth, Mars, and Venus, the lowest level of the atmosphere is the troposphere, where most of the planet's clouds and weather are found.
This extends from the ground up to 65 km on Venus, 40 km on Mars, and 17 km on Earth.
The troposphere contains the bulk of the atmosphere, possessing 80%–98% of the total atmospheric mass.
Temperature varies by altitude according to the lapse rate, as thermal energy from the ground is transported upward via convection.
Infrared radiation becomes trapped by molecules of gas and water vapor.
For the Earth, the next layer is the stratosphere, which is a region of temperature increasing with altitude, creating a temperature inversion.
This region contains the UV-absorbing ozone layer, at an altitude between 15 km and 35 km, which is responsible for the temperature rise.
Energy transport in this region occurs through radiation processes.
Lacking an oxygenated atmosphere to generate a significant layer of ozone, neither Mars nor Venus have a stratosphere.
Above the troposphere-stratosphere, the next layer of the atmosphere is termed the mesosphere.
In this region, the water vapor and carbon dioxide serves as a heat sink that radiates energy in the infrared.
As a result, the temperature of the mesosphere decreases with altitude, reaching the coldest layer of the atmosphere at the top.
Both Venus and Mars have an altitude range in the mesosphere where the temperature is nearly isothermal; for Mars this is above 120 km, while for Venus it is between 63 and 75 km altitude.
In the lower regions of the atmosphere, turbulent mixing causes the atmospheric constituents to be evenly distributed.
Above a transition layer called the homopause, molecular diffusion dominates.
This results in diffuse separation of the constituents by atomic weight; that is, lower mass components diffuse upward leaving higher mass molecules near the bottom.
The homopause is at an altitude of 100–110 km for the Earth, 115–130 km for Mars, and 135–150 km for Venus.
Beyond the mesosphere is a region of the atmosphere called the thermosphere that absorbs X-rays and extreme UV from the Sun, causing temperature to rise with altitude.
The thermal properties of this layer vary daily and with solar activity cycles.
The atmospheric region from the ground through the thermosphere is referred to as the barosphere, since the barometric law holds throughout.
The outermost layer of a planetary atmosphere is termed the exosphere.
Here, the air pressure is so low at this altitude that the distance travelled between molecule collisions, the mean free path, is greater than the atmospheric scale height.
In this region, lower mass components with a thermal velocity exceeding the escape velocity can escape into space.
For the Earth, the exosphere is at an altitude of 500 km, while it is around 210 km for Venus and Mars.
On Earth, the exosphere extends to roughly 10,000 km, where it interacts with the magnetosphere of Earth.
All three planets have an ionosphere, which is an ionized region of the upper atmosphere.
The ionospheres for Mars and Venus are closer to the surface and are less dense than on the Earth.
The density of the Earth's ionosphere is greater at short distances from the planetary surface in the daytime and decreases as the ionosphere rises at night-time, thereby allowing a greater range of radio frequencies to travel greater distances.
Gas giants are primarily composed of hydrogen and helium with traces of other elements, giving the planets a low bulk density.
Many of the molecules observed in the outer atmosphere are hydrides, and most of these (with the exception of H2O and H2S) are photochemically destroyed by solar UV in the stratosphere of Jupiter and Saturn.
These compounds get re-created by thermo-chemical reactions within the hotter, lower regions of the atmosphere.
Complex organic compounds are recycled back to methane by the highly reducing atmosphere.
The high gravity of these planets combined with their distance from the Sun means that mass loss from their exospheres is negligible, so they form closed systems.
A common feature of the gas giant planets are cloud layers that form where the combination of temperature and pressure are appropriate for condensing a particular volatile.
For Jupiter and Saturn, the outermost cloud layer consists of ice particles of ammonia (NH3), with an underlying layer of ammonium hydrosulfide (NH4SH), then a deep layer of water clouds (H2O).
For Uranus and Neptune, the top layer is a methane (CH4) layer of ice particles, followed by the same cloud layers as Jupiter and Saturn.
One difference for Uranus and Neptune is that hydrogen sulfide (H2S) mixes at the same level as the condensed ammonia.
These cloud layers are optically thick, absorbing light at all wavelengths.
The result is a shallower scale height for the outer atmosphere.
All four gas giants experience lightning activity in the water clouds, and this is generally much more powerful than terrestrial lightning.
Lightning has been observed on Jupiter, but has not been optically detected on Saturn, Uranus, or Neptune most likely because of their depth.
All of the gas giants have internal heat sources and radiate more heat than they receive from the Sun.
Models for the interiors of Jupiter and Saturn suggest that at a certain depth the hydrogen undergoes a phase change to a metallic hydrogen fluid mixed with ice.
There is possibly a diffuse or solid core of more massive elements.
For Uranus and Neptune, there is no metallic hydrogen; instead there are interior layers of ice, placing these worlds in the sub-category of ice giants.
At sufficient depth, the ice may transition to a supercritical fluid.
Within the Solar System, gas giant planets formed beyond the frost line, where the temperature from the young Sun was low enough for volatiles to condense into solid grains.
In some star systems, dynamic processes in the protoplanetary disk can cause a gas giant to migrate much closer to the central star, creating a hot Jupiter.
A prototype example is 51 Pegasi b.
Through gravitational interaction, the orbit of the planet becomes circularized and it is tidally locked into a synchronous rotation with one side constantly facing the star.
The heated side becomes swollen, and high velocity winds distribute the thermal energy around the planet.
The atmosphere may eventually be stripped away by the star's gravity, leaving behind a super Earth.
At the upper mass extreme of gas giants is a class of objects known as brown dwarfs.
There is no universal consensus on how to distinguish a brown dwarf from a gas giant, although a commonly used criteria is the ability to fuse deuterium at around 13 times the mass of Jupiter.
Once the initial deuterium burning phase of a brown dwarf is concluded, the internal store of heat gradually makes its way to the surface then is radiated away over time.
Convection occurs around the core, and possibly at the surface if the brown dwarf is receiving energy from a nearby star.
Radiative energy transfer occurs throughout the remainder of the brown dwarf.
Chemistry can occur throughout the atmosphere, which, depending on the chemical species, can change the opacity to radiative energy transfer.
As with gas giants, in the cooler outer regions of a brown dwarf, some molecules can condense to form clouds.
The circulation of the atmosphere occurs due to thermal differences when convection becomes a more efficient transporter of heat than thermal radiation.
On planets where the primary heat source is solar radiation, excess heat in the tropics is transported to higher latitudes.
When a planet generates a significant amount of heat internally, such as is the case for Jupiter, convection in the atmosphere can transport thermal energy from the higher temperature interior up to the surface.
The thermally-driven meridional circulation of Earth, Mars, and Venus are dominated by the Hadley cell.
This is created by rising air in the warmest region of the planet accompanied by descending air where it is cooler.
However, there are significant differences in the circulation patterns between the three planets.
For Venus, the lower atmosphere of Venus has two symmetrical equator to near pole circulation cells, with a higher altitude sub-solar to anti-solar circulation cell.
On Earth, Hadley cells exist on each side of the equator, but these vary seasonally due to the planet's obliquity.
Mars is similar to the Earth in this respect, but it displays greater seasonality due to its thinner atmosphere.
It has two Hadley cells during equinox, but a single cell at solstice.
The Earth has multiple counter-rotating convection cells, with the Hadley cell on either side of the equator, an intermediate Ferrel cell along the mid-latitudes, and polar cells at each pole.
The planet's rotation induces a Coriolis force that creates a curvature in the north-south convection flow.
As air moves toward a pole, the latitudinal flow remains steady but the distance needed to encircle the planet grows shorter, creating a curved path along the surface.
These flows create the prevailing winds along the planet's surface.
Near the equator, the air flow creates the trade winds which flow from east to west.
At the mid-latitudes, the westerlies brings the air flow from the west in the United States and Europe.
Finally, the polar easterlies moves polar air from east to west.
Both Jupiter and Saturn display banded cloud formations.
These are associated with alternating jets known as zonal flows that follow latitudinal lines.
The bands alternate in direction, with the equatorial jet moving eastward at 150 km/s on Jupiter and 300 km/s on Saturn.
It remains unclear whether these flows occur in the shallow layers around the clouds, or extend much deeper into the atmosphere.
Observations of Neptune show a similar zonal flow structure.
This planet displays the largest range of differential rotation in the Solar System.
Surface gravity differs significantly among the planets.
For example, the large gravitational force of the giant planet Jupiter retains light gases such as hydrogen and helium that escape from objects with lower gravity.
Secondly, the distance from the Sun determines the energy available to heat atmospheric gas to the point where some fraction of its molecules' thermal motion exceed the planet's escape velocity, allowing those to escape a planet's gravitational grasp.
Thus, distant and cold Titan, Triton, and Pluto are able to retain components of their original atmospheres despite their relatively low gravities.
Since a collection of gas molecules may be moving at a wide range of velocities, there will always be some fast enough to produce a slow leakage of gas into space.
Lighter molecules move faster than heavier ones with the same thermal kinetic energy, and so gases of low molecular weight are lost more rapidly than those of high molecular weight.
It is thought that Venus and Mars may have lost much of their water when, after being photodissociated into hydrogen and oxygen by solar ultraviolet radiation, the hydrogen escaped.
Earth's magnetic field helps to prevent this, as, normally, the solar wind would greatly enhance the escape of hydrogen.
However, over the past 3 billion years Earth may have lost gases through the magnetic polar regions due to auroral activity, including a net 2% of its atmospheric oxygen.
The net effect, taking the most important escape processes into account, is that an intrinsic magnetic field does not protect a planet from atmospheric escape and that for some magnetizations the presence of a magnetic field works to increase the escape rate.
Planets around small M-type main-sequence stars may be particularly prone to atmospheric loss.
The star will spend an extended period as a superluminous pre-main-sequence star, then experience high levels of activity.
The strong stellar magnetic field will tend to reduce the size of planetary magnetospheres, leading to greater erosion from the stellar wind.
Planets around older M-type stars may become tidally locked in synchronous orbit, leading to the atmosphere being permanently frozen on the dark face.
Other mechanisms that can cause atmosphere depletion are solar wind-induced sputtering, impact erosion, weathering, and sequestration—sometimes referred to as "freezing out"—into the regolith and polar caps.
An extreme example of the latter is a comet, which is a small body that forms beyond the frost line in the protoplanetary disk.
These objects contain many types of frozen volatiles, including water, carbon dioxide, ammonia, methane, and formaldehyde.
As these objects approach the Sun, the thermal radiation causes the volatiles to sublimate, creating a diffuse, dusty atmosphere around the comet; the coma.
However, the gravitational potential of the comet is insufficient to retain this atmosphere.
The Solar System contains a large number of bodies that are now practically airless, such as Mercury and the Moon.
These objects have only an exosphere layer with particles that are essentially collisionless.
In this environment, atoms and molecules are released from the surface by various means, including particle sputtering and micrometeorite impact.
When the release velocity of these particles exceed the escape velocity, they are lost to space.
Higher mass particles have a greater chance to be returned to the surface, which creates a chemical alteration of the surface over time.
On a terrestrial planet, the part of the atmosphere that directly interacts with the ground is known as the planetary boundary layer.
Atmospheres have dramatic effects on the surfaces of rocky bodies.
Wind erosion is a significant factor in shaping the terrain of rocky planets with atmospheres, and over time can erase the effects of both craters and volcanoes.
In addition, since liquids cannot exist without pressure, an atmosphere allows liquid to be present at the surface, resulting in lakes, rivers and oceans.
Earth and Titan are known to have liquids at their surface and terrain on the planet Mars suggests that it had liquid on its surface in the past.
Objects that have no atmosphere, or that have only an exosphere, have terrain that is covered in craters.
Without an atmosphere, the planet has no protection from meteoroids, and all of them collide with the surface as meteorites and create craters.
For planets with a significant atmosphere, most meteoroids burn up as meteors before hitting a planet's surface.
When meteoroids do impact, the effects are often erased by the action of wind.
From the perspective of a planetary geologist, the atmosphere acts to shape a planetary surface.
Wind picks up dust and other particles which, when they collide with the terrain, erode the relief and leave deposits (eolian processes).
Frost and precipitations, which depend on the atmospheric composition, also influence the relief.
Climate changes can influence a planet's geological history.
Conversely, studying the surface of the Earth leads to an understanding of the atmosphere and climate of other planets.
For a meteorologist, the composition of the Earth's atmosphere is a factor affecting the climate and its variations.
For a biologist or paleontologist, the Earth's atmospheric composition is closely dependent on the appearance of life and its evolution.
In astrobiology, the composition of an exoplanet's atmosphere is closely intertwined with the possibility of extraterrestrial life.
The ocean is the body of salt water that covers approximately 70.
The ocean is conventionally divided into large bodies of water, which are also referred to as oceans (in descending order by area: the Pacific Ocean, the Atlantic Ocean, the Indian Ocean, the Antarctic/Southern Ocean, and the Arctic Ocean), and are themselves mostly divided into seas, gulfs and subsequent bodies of water.
The ocean contains 97% of Earth's water and is the primary component of Earth's hydrosphere, acting as a huge reservoir of heat for Earth's energy budget, as well as for its carbon cycle and water cycle, forming the basis for climate and weather patterns worldwide.
The ocean is essential to life on Earth, harbouring most of Earth's animals and protist life, originating photosynthesis and therefore Earth's atmospheric oxygen, still supplying half of it.
Ocean scientists split the ocean into vertical and horizontal zones based on physical and biological conditions.
Horizontally the ocean covers the oceanic crust, which it shapes.
Where the ocean meets dry land it covers relatively shallow continental shelves, which are part of Earth's continental crust.
Human activity is mostly coastal with high negative impacts on marine life.
Vertically the pelagic zone is the open ocean's water column from the surface to the ocean floor.
The water column is further divided into zones based on depth and the amount of light present.
The photic zone starts at the surface and is defined to be "the depth at which light intensity is only 1% of the surface value" (approximately 200 m in the open ocean).
This is the zone where photosynthesis can occur.
In this process plants and microscopic algae (free-floating phytoplankton) use light, water, carbon dioxide, and nutrients to produce organic matter.
As a result, the photic zone is the most biodiverse and the source of the food supply which sustains most of the ocean ecosystem.
Light can only penetrate a few hundred more meters; the rest of the deeper ocean is cold and dark (these zones are called mesopelagic and aphotic zones).
Ocean temperatures depend on the amount of solar radiation reaching the ocean surface.
In the tropics, surface temperatures can rise to over 30 °C (86 °F).
Near the poles where sea ice forms, the temperature in equilibrium is about −2 °C (28 °F).
In all parts of the ocean, deep ocean temperatures range between −2 °C (28 °F) and 5 °C (41 °F).
Constant circulation of water in the ocean creates ocean currents.
Those currents are caused by forces operating on the water, such as temperature and salinity differences, atmospheric circulation (wind), and the Coriolis effect.
Tides create tidal currents, while wind and waves cause surface currents.
The Gulf Stream, Kuroshio Current, Agulhas Current and Antarctic Circumpolar Current are all major ocean currents.
Such currents transport massive amounts of water, gases, pollutants and heat to different parts of the world, and from the surface into the deep ocean.
All this has impacts on the global climate system.
Ocean water contains dissolved gases, including oxygen, carbon dioxide and nitrogen.
An exchange of these gases occurs at the ocean's surface.
The solubility of these gases depends on the temperature and salinity of the water.
The carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere is rising due to CO2 emissions, mainly from fossil fuel combustion.
As the oceans absorb CO2 from the atmosphere, a higher concentration leads to ocean acidification (a drop in pH value).
The ocean provides many benefits to humans such as ecosystem services, access to seafood and other marine resources, and a means of transport.
The ocean is known to be the habitat of over 230,000 species, but may hold considerably more – perhaps over two million species.
Yet, the ocean faces many environmental threats, such as marine pollution, overfishing, and the effects of climate change.
Those effects include ocean warming, ocean acidification and sea level rise.
The continental shelf and coastal waters are most affected by human activity.
The terms "the ocean" or "the sea" used without specification refer to the interconnected body of salt water covering the majority of Earth's surface, i.
It includes the Pacific, Atlantic, Indian, Antarctic/Southern, and Arctic oceans.
As a general term, "the ocean" and "the sea" are often interchangeable.
Strictly speaking, a "sea" is a body of water (generally a division of the world ocean) partly or fully enclosed by land.
The word "sea" can also be used for many specific, much smaller bodies of seawater, such as the North Sea or the Red Sea.
There is no sharp distinction between seas and oceans, though generally seas are smaller, and are often partly (as marginal seas) or wholly (as inland seas) bordered by land.
In medieval Europe, the World Sea was the body of water that encircled the Continent (the mainland of Europe, Asia and Africa), and thus excluded the Mediterranean, Black and Caspian Seas.
The contemporary concept of the World Ocean was coined in the early 20th century by the Russian oceanographer Yuly Shokalsky to refer to the continuous ocean that covers and encircles most of Earth.
The global, interconnected body of salt water is sometimes referred to as the World Ocean, the global ocean or the great ocean.
The concept of a continuous body of water with relatively unrestricted exchange between its components is critical in oceanography.
The word ocean comes from the figure in classical antiquity, Oceanus (; Ancient Greek: Ὠκεανός Ōkeanós, pronounced [ɔːkeanós]), the elder of the Titans in classical Greek mythology.
Oceanus was believed by the ancient Greeks and Romans to be the divine personification of an enormous river encircling the world.
The concept of Ōkeanós could have an Indo-European connection.
Greek Ōkeanós has been compared to the Vedic epithet ā-śáyāna-, predicated of the dragon Vṛtra-, who captured the cows/rivers.
Related to this notion, the Okeanos is represented with a dragon-tail on some early Greek vases.
Scientists believe that a sizable quantity of water would have been in the material that formed Earth.
Water molecules would have escaped Earth's gravity more easily when it was less massive during its formation.
This is called atmospheric escape.
During planetary formation, Earth possibly had magma oceans.
Subsequently, outgassing, volcanic activity and meteorite impacts, produced an early atmosphere of carbon dioxide, nitrogen and water vapor, according to current theories.
The gases and the atmosphere are thought to have accumulated over millions of years.
After Earth's surface had significantly cooled, the water vapor over time would have condensed, forming Earth's first oceans.
The early oceans might have been significantly hotter than today and appeared green due to high iron content.
Geological evidence helps constrain the time frame for liquid water existing on Earth.
A sample of pillow basalt (a type of rock formed during an underwater eruption) was recovered from the Isua Greenstone Belt and provides evidence that water existed on Earth 3.
In the Nuvvuagittuq Greenstone Belt, Quebec, Canada, rocks dated at 3.
If oceans existed earlier than this, any geological evidence either has yet to be discovered, or has since been destroyed by geological processes like crustal recycling.
However, in August 2020, researchers reported that sufficient water to fill the oceans may have always been on the Earth since the beginning of the planet's formation.
In this model, atmospheric greenhouse gases kept the oceans from freezing when the newly forming Sun had only 70% of its current luminosity.
The origin of Earth's oceans is unknown.
Oceans are thought to have formed in the Hadean eon and may have been the cause for the emergence of life.
Plate tectonics, post-glacial rebound, and sea level rise continually change the coastline and structure of the world ocean.
A global ocean has existed in one form or another on Earth for eons.
Since its formation the ocean has taken many conditions and shapes with many past ocean divisions and potentially at times covering the whole globe.
During colder climatic periods, more ice caps and glaciers form, and enough of the global water supply accumulates as ice to lessen the amounts in other parts of the water cycle.
The reverse is true during warm periods.
During the last ice age, glaciers covered almost one-third of Earth's land mass with the result being that the oceans were about 122 m (400 ft) lower than today.
During the last global "warm spell," about 125,000 years ago, the seas were about 5.
About three million years ago the oceans could have been up to 50 m (165 ft) higher.
The entire ocean, containing 97% of Earth's water, spans 70.
This makes Earth, along with its vibrant hydrosphere a "water world" or "ocean world", particularly in Earth's early history when the ocean is thought to have possibly covered Earth completely.
The ocean's shape is irregular, unevenly dominating Earth's surface.
This leads to the distinction of Earth's surface into land and water hemispheres, as well as the division of the ocean into different oceans.
Seawater covers about 361,000,000 km2 (139,000,000 sq mi) and the ocean's furthest pole of inaccessibility, known as "Point Nemo", in a region known as spacecraft cemetery of the South Pacific Ocean, at 48°52.
This point is roughly 2,688 km (1,670 mi) from the nearest land.
There are different customs to subdivide the ocean and are adjourned by smaller bodies of water such as bays, bights, gulfs, seas, and straits.
For practical and historical reasons, it is customary to divide the World Ocean into a set of five major oceans.
By convention these are the Pacific, Atlantic, Indian, Arctic, and Southern (Antarctic) oceans.
This five-ocean model only fully crystallized in the early 21st century, when the Southern Ocean, delineated by the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, was recognized by various government and international bodies: by the U.
Board on Geographic Names since 1999, and by the International Hydrographic Organization since 2000.
The ocean fills Earth's oceanic basins.
Earth's oceanic basins cover different geologic provinces of Earth's oceanic crust as well as continental crust.
As such it covers mainly Earth's structural basins, but also continental shelves.
Beside the world ocean, the Black and Caspian seas also occupy oceanic basins; the Mediterranean has in the past been cut off into its own basin.
In mid-ocean, magma is constantly being thrust through the seabed between adjoining plates to form mid-oceanic ridges and here convection currents within the mantle tend to drive the two plates apart.
Parallel to these ridges and nearer the coasts, one oceanic plate may slide beneath another oceanic plate in a process known as subduction.
Deep trenches are formed here and the process is accompanied by friction as the plates grind together.
The movement proceeds in jerks which cause earthquakes, heat is produced and magma is forced up creating underwater mountains, some of which may form chains of volcanic islands near to deep trenches.
Near some of the boundaries between the land and sea, the slightly denser oceanic plates slide beneath the continental plates and more subduction trenches are formed.
As they grate together, the continental plates are deformed and buckle causing mountain building and seismic activity.
Every ocean basin has a mid-ocean ridge, which creates a long mountain range beneath the ocean.
Together they form the global mid-oceanic ridge system that features the longest mountain range in the world.
The longest continuous mountain range is 65,000 km (40,000 mi).
This underwater mountain range is several times longer than the longest continental mountain range – the Andes.
Oceanographers of the Nippon Foundation-GEBCO Seabed 2030 Project (Seabed 2030) state that as of 2024 just over 26% of the ocean floor has been mapped at a higher resolution than provided by satellites, while the ocean as a whole will never be fully explored, with some estimating 5% of it having been explored.
The zone where land meets sea is known as the coast, and the part between the lowest spring tides and the upper limit reached by splashing waves is the shore.
A beach is the accumulation of sand or shingle on the shore.
A headland is a point of land jutting out into the sea and a larger promontory is known as a cape.
The indentation of a coastline, especially between two headlands, is a bay.
A small bay with a narrow inlet is a cove and a large bay may be referred to as a gulf.
Coastlines are influenced by several factors, including the strength of the waves arriving on the shore, the gradient of the land margin, the composition and hardness of the coastal rock, the inclination of the off-shore slope and the changes of the level of the land due to local uplift or submergence.
Normally, waves roll towards the shore at the rate of six to eight per minute and these are known as constructive waves as they tend to move material up the beach and have little erosive effect.
Storm waves arrive on shore in rapid succession and are known as destructive waves as the swash moves beach material seawards.
Under their influence, the sand and shingle on the beach is ground together and abraded.
Around high tide, the power of a storm wave impacting on the foot of a cliff has a shattering effect as air in cracks and crevices is compressed and then expands rapidly with release of pressure.
At the same time, sand and pebbles have an erosive effect as they are thrown against the rocks.
This tends to undercut the cliff, and normal weathering processes such as the action of frost follows, causing further destruction.
Gradually, a wave-cut platform develops at the foot of the cliff and this has a protective effect, reducing further wave-erosion.
Material worn from the margins of the land eventually ends up in the sea.
Here it is subject to attrition as currents flowing parallel to the coast scour out channels and transport sand and pebbles away from their place of origin.
Sediment carried to the sea by rivers settles on the seabed causing deltas to form in estuaries.
All these materials move back and forth under the influence of waves, tides and currents.
Dredging removes material and deepens channels but may have unexpected effects elsewhere on the coastline.
Governments make efforts to prevent flooding of the land by the building of breakwaters, seawalls, dykes and levees and other sea defences.
For instance, the Thames Barrier is designed to protect London from a storm surge, while the failure of the dykes and levees around New Orleans during Hurricane Katrina created a humanitarian crisis in the United States.
Ocean water represents the largest body of water within the global water cycle (oceans contain 97% of Earth's water).
Evaporation from the ocean moves water into the atmosphere to later rain back down onto land and the ocean.
Oceans have a significant effect on the biosphere.
The ocean as a whole is thought to cover approximately 90% of the Earth's biosphere.
Oceanic evaporation, as a phase of the water cycle, is the source of most rainfall (about 90%), causing a global cloud cover of 67% and a consistent oceanic cloud cover of 72%.
Ocean temperatures affect climate and wind patterns that affect life on land.
One of the most dramatic forms of weather occurs over the oceans: tropical cyclones (also called "typhoons" and "hurricanes" depending upon where the system forms).
As the world's ocean is the principal component of Earth's hydrosphere, it is integral to life on Earth, forms part of the carbon cycle and water cycle, and – as a huge heat reservoir – influences climate and weather patterns.
The motions of the ocean surface, known as undulations or wind waves, are the partial and alternate rising and falling of the ocean surface.
The series of mechanical waves that propagate along the interface between water and air is called swell – a term used in sailing, surfing and navigation.
These motions profoundly affect ships on the surface of the ocean and the well-being of people on those ships who might suffer from sea sickness.
Wind blowing over the surface of a body of water forms waves that are perpendicular to the direction of the wind.
The friction between air and water caused by a gentle breeze on a pond causes ripples to form.
A stronger gust blowing over the ocean causes larger waves as the moving air pushes against the raised ridges of water.
The waves reach their maximum height when the rate at which they are travelling nearly matches the speed of the wind.
In open water, when the wind blows continuously as happens in the Southern Hemisphere in the Roaring Forties, long, organized masses of water called swell roll across the ocean.
If the wind dies down, the wave formation is reduced, but already-formed waves continue to travel in their original direction until they meet land.
The size of the waves depends on the fetch, the distance that the wind has blown over the water and the strength and duration of that wind.
When waves meet others coming from different directions, interference between the two can produce broken, irregular seas.
Constructive interference can lead to the formation of unusually high rogue waves.
Most waves are less than 3 m (10 ft) high and it is not unusual for strong storms to double or triple that height.
Rogue waves, however, have been documented at heights above 25 meters (82 ft).
The top of a wave is known as the crest, the lowest point between waves is the trough and the distance between the crests is the wavelength.
The wave is pushed across the surface of the ocean by the wind, but this represents a transfer of energy and not horizontal movement of water.
As waves approach land and move into shallow water, they change their behavior.
If approaching at an angle, waves may bend (refraction) or wrap around rocks and headlands (diffraction).
When the wave reaches a point where its deepest oscillations of the water contact the ocean floor, they begin to slow down.
This pulls the crests closer together and increases the waves' height, which is called wave shoaling.
When the ratio of the wave's height to the water depth increases above a certain limit, it "breaks", toppling over in a mass of foaming water.
This rushes in a sheet up the beach before retreating into the ocean under the influence of gravity.
Earthquakes, volcanic eruptions or other major geological disturbances can set off waves that can lead to tsunamis in coastal areas which can be very dangerous.
The ocean's surface is an important reference point for oceanography and geography, particularly as mean sea level.
The ocean surface has globally little, but measurable topography, depending on the ocean's volumes.
The ocean surface is a crucial interface for oceanic and atmospheric processes.
Allowing interchange of particles, enriching the air and water, as well as grounds by some particles becoming sediments.
This interchange has fertilized life in the ocean, on land and air.
All these processes and components together make up ocean surface ecosystems.
Tides are the regular rise and fall in water level experienced by oceans, primarily driven by the Moon's gravitational tidal forces upon the Earth.
Tidal forces affect all matter on Earth, but only fluids like the ocean demonstrate the effects on human timescales.
Earth's tidal forces upon the Moon are 20x stronger than the Moon's tidal forces on the Earth.
The primary effect of lunar tidal forces is to bulge Earth matter towards the near and far sides of the Earth, relative to the moon.
The "perpendicular" sides, from which the Moon appears in line with the local horizon, experience "tidal troughs".
Since it takes nearly 25 hours for the Earth to rotate under the Moon (accounting for the Moon's 28-day orbit around Earth), tides thus cycle over a course of 12.
However, the rocky continents pose obstacles for the tidal bulges, so the timing of tidal maxima may not actually align with the Moon in most localities on Earth, as the oceans are forced to "dodge" the continents.
Timing and magnitude of tides vary widely across the Earth as a result of the continents.
Thus, knowing the Moon's position does not allow a local to predict tide timings, instead requiring precomputed tide tables which account for the continents and the Sun, among others.
During each tidal cycle, at any given place the tidal waters rise to maximum height, high tide, before ebbing away again to the minimum level, low tide.
As the water recedes, it gradually reveals the foreshore, also known as the intertidal zone.
The difference in height between the high tide and low tide is known as the tidal range or tidal amplitude.
When the sun and moon are aligned (full moon or new moon), the combined effect results in the higher "spring tides", while the sun and moon misaligning (half moons) result in lesser tidal ranges.
In the open ocean tidal ranges are less than 1 meter, but in coastal areas these tidal ranges increase to more than 10 meters in some areas.
Some of the largest tidal ranges in the world occur in the Bay of Fundy and Ungava Bay in Canada, reaching up to 16 meters.
Other locations with record high tidal ranges include the Bristol Channel between England and Wales, Cook Inlet in Alaska, and the Río Gallegos in Argentina.
Tides are not to be confused with storm surges, which can occur when high winds pile water up against the coast in a shallow area and this, coupled with a low pressure system, can raise the surface of the ocean dramatically above a typical high tide.
The average depth of the oceans is about 4 km.
More precisely the average depth is 3,688 meters (12,100 ft).
Nearly half of the world's marine waters are over 3,000 meters (9,800 ft) deep.
This figure does not include seas not connected to the World Ocean, such as the Caspian Sea.
The deepest region of the ocean is at the Mariana Trench, located in the Pacific Ocean near the Northern Mariana Islands.
The maximum depth has been estimated to be 10,971 meters (35,994 ft).
The British naval vessel Challenger II surveyed the trench in 1951 and named the deepest part of the trench the "Challenger Deep".
In 1960, the Trieste successfully reached the bottom of the trench, manned by a crew of two men.
Oceanographers classify the ocean into vertical and horizontal zones based on physical and biological conditions.
The pelagic zone consists of the water column of the open ocean, and can be divided into further regions categorized by light abundance and by depth.
The photic zone is defined to be "the depth at which light intensity is only 1% of the surface value".
This is usually up to a depth of approximately 200 m in the open ocean.
It is the region where photosynthesis can occur and is, therefore, the most biodiverse.
Photosynthesis by plants and microscopic algae (free floating phytoplankton) allows the creation of organic matter from chemical precursors including water and carbon dioxide.
This organic matter can then be consumed by other creatures.
Much of the organic matter created in the photic zone is consumed there but some sinks into deeper waters.
The pelagic part of the photic zone is known as the epipelagic.
The actual optics of light reflecting and penetrating at the ocean surface are complex.
Below the photic zone is the mesopelagic or twilight zone where there is a very small amount of light.
The basic concept is that with that little light photosynthesis is unlikely to achieve any net growth over respiration.
Below that is the aphotic deep ocean to which no surface sunlight at all penetrates.
Life that exists deeper than the photic zone must either rely on material sinking from above (see marine snow) or find another energy source.
Hydrothermal vents are a source of energy in what is known as the aphotic zone (depths exceeding 200 m).
The mesopelagic is the uppermost region.
Its lowermost boundary is at a thermocline of 12 °C (54 °F) which generally lies at 700–1,000 meters (2,300–3,300 ft) in the tropics.
Next is the bathypelagic lying between 10 and 4 °C (50 and 39 °F), typically between 700–1,000 meters (2,300–3,300 ft) and 2,000–4,000 meters (6,600–13,100 ft).
Lying along the top of the abyssal plain is the abyssopelagic, whose lower boundary lies at about 6,000 meters (20,000 ft).
The last and deepest zone is the hadalpelagic which includes the oceanic trench and lies between 6,000–11,000 meters (20,000–36,000 ft).
The benthic zones are aphotic and correspond to the three deepest zones of the deep-sea.
The bathyal zone covers the continental slope down to about 4,000 meters (13,000 ft).
The abyssal zone covers the abyssal plains between 4,000 and 6,000 m.
Lastly, the hadal zone corresponds to the hadalpelagic zone, which is found in oceanic trenches.
Distinct boundaries between ocean surface waters and deep waters can be drawn based on the properties of the water.
These boundaries are called thermoclines (temperature), haloclines (salinity), chemoclines (chemistry), and pycnoclines (density).
If a zone undergoes dramatic changes in temperature with depth, it contains a thermocline, a distinct boundary between warmer surface water and colder deep water.
In tropical regions, the thermocline is typically deeper compared to higher latitudes.
Unlike polar waters, where solar energy input is limited, temperature stratification is less pronounced, and a distinct thermocline is often absent.
This is due to the fact that surface waters in polar latitudes are nearly as cold as deeper waters.
Below the thermocline, water everywhere in the ocean is very cold, ranging from −1 °C to 3 °C.
Because this deep and cold layer contains the bulk of ocean water, the average temperature of the world ocean is 3.
If a zone undergoes dramatic changes in salinity with depth, it contains a halocline.
If a zone undergoes a strong, vertical chemistry gradient with depth, it contains a chemocline.
Temperature and salinity control ocean water density.
Colder and saltier water is denser, and this density plays a crucial role in regulating the global water circulation within the ocean.
The halocline often coincides with the thermocline, and the combination produces a pronounced pycnocline, a boundary between less dense surface water and dense deep water.
The pelagic zone can be further subdivided into two sub regions based on distance from land: the neritic zone and the oceanic zone.
The neritic zone covers the water directly above the continental shelves, including coastal waters.
On the other hand, the oceanic zone includes all the completely open water.
The littoral zone covers the region between low and high tide and represents the transitional area between marine and terrestrial conditions.
It is also known as the intertidal zone because it is the area where tide level affects the conditions of the region.
The combined volume of water in all the oceans is roughly 1.
Ocean temperatures depends on the amount of solar radiation falling on its surface.
In the tropics, with the Sun nearly overhead, the temperature of the surface layers can rise to over 30 °C (86 °F) while near the poles the temperature in equilibrium with the sea ice is about −2 °C (28 °F).
There is a continuous circulation of water in the oceans.
Warm surface currents cool as they move away from the tropics, and the water becomes denser and sinks.
The cold water moves back towards the equator as a deep sea current, driven by changes in the temperature and density of the water, before eventually welling up again towards the surface.
Deep ocean water has a temperature between −2 °C (28 °F) and 5 °C (41 °F) in all parts of the globe.
The temperature gradient over the water depth is related to the way the surface water mixes with deeper water or does not mix (a lack of mixing is called ocean stratification).
This depends on the temperature: in the tropics the warm surface layer of about 100 m is quite stable and does not mix much with deeper water, while near the poles winter cooling and storms makes the surface layer denser and it mixes to great depth and then stratifies again in summer.
The photic depth is typically about 100 m (but varies) and is related to this heated surface layer.
The temperature and salinity of ocean waters vary significantly across different regions.
This is due to differences in the local water balance (precipitation vs.
These characteristics can vary widely from one ocean region to another.
The table below provides an illustration of the sort of values usually encountered.
Seawater with a typical salinity of 35‰ has a freezing point of about −1.
Because sea ice is less dense than water, it floats on the ocean's surface (as does fresh water ice, which has an even lower density).
Sea ice covers about 7% of the Earth's surface and about 12% of the world's oceans.
Sea ice usually starts to freeze at the very surface, initially as a very thin ice film.
As further freezing takes place, this ice film thickens and can form ice sheets.
The ice formed incorporates some sea salt, but much less than the seawater it forms from.
As the ice forms with low salinity this results in saltier residual seawater.
This in turn increases density and promotes vertical sinking of the water.
An ocean current is a continuous, directed flow of seawater caused by several forces acting upon the water.
These include wind, the Coriolis effect, temperature and salinity differences.
Ocean currents are primarily horizontal water movements that have different origins such as tides for tidal currents, or wind and waves for surface currents.
Tidal currents are in phase with the tide, hence are quasiperiodic; associated with the influence of the moon and sun pull on the ocean water.
Tidal currents may form various complex patterns in certain places, most notably around headlands.
Non-periodic or non-tidal currents are created by the action of winds and changes in density of water.
In littoral zones, breaking waves are so intense and the depth measurement so low, that maritime currents reach often 1 to 2 knots.
The wind and waves create surface currents (designated as "drift currents").
These currents can decompose in one quasi-permanent current (which varies within the hourly scale) and one movement of Stokes drift under the effect of rapid waves movement (which vary on timescales of a couple of seconds).
The quasi-permanent current is accelerated by the breaking of waves, and in a lesser governing effect, by the friction of the wind on the surface.
This acceleration of the current takes place in the direction of waves and dominant wind.
Accordingly, when the ocean depth increases, the rotation of the earth changes the direction of currents in proportion with the increase of depth, while friction lowers their speed.
At a certain ocean depth, the current changes direction and is seen inverted in the opposite direction with current speed becoming null: known as the Ekman spiral.
The influence of these currents is mainly experienced at the mixed layer of the ocean surface, often from 400 to 800 meters of maximum depth.
These currents can considerably change and are dependent on the yearly seasons.
If the mixed layer is less thick (10 to 20 meters), the quasi-permanent current at the surface can adopt quite a different direction in relation to the direction of the wind.
In this case, the water column becomes virtually homogeneous above the thermocline.
The wind blowing on the ocean surface will set the water in motion.
The global pattern of winds (also called atmospheric circulation) creates a global pattern of ocean currents.
These are driven not only by the wind but also by the effect of the circulation of the earth (coriolis force).
These major ocean currents include the Gulf Stream, Kuroshio Current, Agulhas Current and Antarctic Circumpolar Current.
The Antarctic Circumpolar Current encircles Antarctica and influences the area's climate, connecting currents in several oceans.
Collectively, currents move enormous amounts of water and heat around the globe influencing climate.
These wind driven currents are largely confined to the top hundreds of meters of the ocean.
At greater depth, the thermohaline circulation drives water motion.
For example, the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC) is driven by the cooling of surface waters in the polar latitudes in the north and south, creating dense water which sinks to the bottom of the ocean.
This cold and dense water moves slowly away from the poles which is why the waters in the deepest layers of the world ocean are so cold.
This deep ocean water circulation is relatively slow and water at the bottom of the ocean can be isolated from the ocean surface and atmosphere for hundreds or even a few thousand years.
This circulation has important impacts on the global climate system and on the uptake and redistribution of pollutants and gases such as carbon dioxide, for example by moving contaminants from the surface into the deep ocean.
Ocean currents greatly affect Earth's climate by transferring heat from the tropics to the polar regions.
This affects air temperature and precipitation in coastal regions and further inland.
Surface heat and freshwater fluxes create global density gradients, which drive the thermohaline circulation that is a part of large-scale ocean circulation.
It plays an important role in supplying heat to the polar regions, and thus in sea ice regulation.
Oceans moderate the climate of locations where prevailing winds blow in from the ocean.
At similar latitudes, a place on Earth with more influence from the ocean will have a more moderate climate than a place with more influence from land.
For example, the cities San Francisco (37.
San Francisco, on the west coast of North America, gets winds from the west over the Pacific Ocean.
New York, on the east coast of North America gets winds from the west over land, so New York has colder winters and hotter, earlier summers than San Francisco.
Warmer ocean currents yield warmer climates in the long term, even at high latitudes.
At similar latitudes, a place influenced by warm ocean currents will have a warmer climate overall than a place influenced by cold ocean currents.
Changes in the thermohaline circulation are thought to have significant impacts on Earth's energy budget.
Because the thermohaline circulation determines the rate at which deep waters reach the surface, it may also significantly influence atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations.
Modern observations, climate simulations and paleoclimate reconstructions suggest that the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC) has weakened since the preindustrial era.
The latest climate change projections in 2021 suggest that the AMOC is likely to weaken further over the 21st century.
Such a weakening could cause large changes to global climate, with the North Atlantic particularly vulnerable.
Salinity is a measure of the total amounts of dissolved salts in seawater.
It was originally measured via measurement of the amount of chloride in seawater and hence termed chlorinity.
It is now standard practice to gauge it by measuring electrical conductivity of the water sample.
Salinity can be calculated using the chlorinity, which is a measure of the total mass of halogen ions (includes fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine) in seawater.
The average ocean water chlorinity is about 19.
Salinity has a major influence on the density of seawater.
A zone of rapid salinity increase with depth is called a halocline.
As seawater's salt content increases, so does the temperature at which its maximum density occurs.
Salinity affects both the freezing and boiling points of water, with the boiling point increasing with salinity.
At atmospheric pressure, normal seawater freezes at a temperature of about −2 °C.
Salinity is higher in Earth's oceans where there is more evaporation and lower where there is more precipitation.
If precipitation exceeds evaporation, as is the case in polar and some temperate regions, salinity will be lower.
Salinity will be higher if evaporation exceeds precipitation, as is sometimes the case in tropical regions.
For example, evaporation is greater than precipitation in the Mediterranean Sea, which has an average salinity of 38‰, more saline than the global average of 34.
Thus, oceanic waters in polar regions have lower salinity content than oceanic waters in tropical regions.
However, when sea ice forms at high latitudes, salt is excluded from the ice as it forms, which can increase the salinity in the residual seawater in polar regions such as the Arctic Ocean.
Due to the effects of climate change on oceans, observations of sea surface salinity between 1950 and 2019 indicate that regions of high salinity and evaporation have become more saline while regions of low salinity and more precipitation have become fresher.
It is very likely that the Pacific and Antarctic/Southern Oceans have freshened while the Atlantic has become more saline.
Ocean water contains large quantities of dissolved gases, including oxygen, carbon dioxide and nitrogen.
These dissolve into ocean water via gas exchange at the ocean surface, with the solubility of these gases depending on the temperature and salinity of the water.
The four most abundant gases in earth's atmosphere and oceans are nitrogen, oxygen, argon, and carbon dioxide.
In the ocean by volume, the most abundant gases dissolved in seawater are carbon dioxide (including bicarbonate and carbonate ions, 14 mL/L on average), nitrogen (9 mL/L), and oxygen (5 mL/L) at equilibrium at 24 °C (75 °F) All gases are more soluble – more easily dissolved – in colder water than in warmer water.
For example, when salinity and pressure are held constant, oxygen concentration in water almost doubles when the temperature drops from that of a warm summer day 30 °C (86 °F) to freezing 0 °C (32 °F).
Similarly, carbon dioxide and nitrogen gases are more soluble at colder temperatures, and their solubility changes with temperature at different rates.
Photosynthesis in the surface ocean releases oxygen and consumes carbon dioxide.
Phytoplankton, a type of microscopic free-floating algae, controls this process.
After the plants have grown, oxygen is consumed and carbon dioxide released, as a result of bacterial decomposition of the organic matter created by photosynthesis in the ocean.
The sinking and bacterial decomposition of some organic matter in deep ocean water, at depths where the waters are out of contact with the atmosphere, leads to a reduction in oxygen concentrations and increase in carbon dioxide, carbonate and bicarbonate.
This cycling of carbon dioxide in oceans is an important part of the global carbon cycle.
The oceans represent a major carbon sink for carbon dioxide taken up from the atmosphere by photosynthesis and by dissolution (see also carbon sequestration).
There is also increased attention on carbon dioxide uptake in coastal marine habitats such as mangroves and saltmarshes.
This process is often referred to as "Blue carbon".
The focus is on these ecosystems because they are strong carbon sinks as well as ecologically important habitats under threat from human activities and environmental degradation.
As deep ocean water circulates throughout the globe, it contains gradually less oxygen and gradually more carbon dioxide with more time away from the air at the surface.
This gradual decrease in oxygen concentration happens as sinking organic matter continuously gets decomposed during the time the water is out of contact with the atmosphere.
Most of the deep waters of the ocean still contain relatively high concentrations of oxygen sufficient for most animals to survive.
However, some ocean areas have very low oxygen due to long periods of isolation of the water from the atmosphere.
These oxygen deficient areas, called oxygen minimum zones or hypoxic waters, will generally be made worse by the effects of climate change on oceans.
The pH value at the surface of oceans (global mean surface pH) is currently approximately in the range of 8.
This makes it slightly alkaline.
The pH value at the surface used to be about 8.
However, between 1950 and 2020, the average pH of the ocean surface fell from approximately 8.
Carbon dioxide emissions from human activities are the primary cause of this process called ocean acidification, with atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) levels exceeding 410 ppm (in 2020).
CO2 from the atmosphere is absorbed by the oceans.
This produces carbonic acid (H2CO3) which dissociates into a bicarbonate ion (HCO−3) and a hydrogen ion (H+).
The presence of free hydrogen ions (H+) lowers the pH of the ocean.
There is a natural gradient of pH in the ocean which is related to the breakdown of organic matter in deep water which slowly lowers the pH with depth: The pH value of seawater is naturally as low as 7.
It can be as high as 8.
The definition of global mean surface pH refers to the top layer of the water in the ocean, up to around 20 or 100 m depth.
In comparison, the average depth of the ocean is about 4 km.
The pH value at greater depths (more than 100 m) has not yet been affected by ocean acidification in the same way.
There is a large body of deeper water where the natural gradient of pH from 8.
But as the top layer of the ocean (the photic zone) is crucial for its marine productivity, any changes to the pH value and temperature of the top layer can have many knock-on effects, for example on marine life and ocean currents (such as effects of climate change on oceans).
The key issue in terms of the penetration of ocean acidification is the way the surface water mixes with deeper water or does not mix (a lack of mixing is called ocean stratification).
This in turn depends on the water temperature and hence is different between the tropics and the polar regions (see ocean#Temperature).
The chemical properties of seawater complicate pH measurement, and several distinct pH scales exist in chemical oceanography.
There is no universally accepted reference pH-scale for seawater and the difference between measurements based on multiple reference scales may be up to 0.
Alkalinity is the balance of base (proton acceptors) and acids (proton donors) in seawater, or indeed any natural waters.
The alkalinity acts as a chemical buffer, regulating the pH of seawater.
While there are many ions in seawater that can contribute to the alkalinity, many of these are at very low concentrations.
This means that the carbonate, bicarbonate and borate ions are the only significant contributors to seawater alkalinity in the open ocean with well oxygenated waters.
The first two of these ions contribute more than 95% of this alkalinity.
The growth of phytoplankton in surface ocean waters leads to the conversion of some bicarbonate and carbonate ions into organic matter.
Some of this organic matter sinks into the deep ocean where it is broken down back into carbonate and bicarbonate.
This process is related to ocean productivity or marine primary production.
Thus alkalinity tends to increase with depth and also along the global thermohaline circulation from the Atlantic to the Pacific and Indian Ocean, although these increases are small.
The concentrations vary overall by only a few percent.
The absorption of CO2 from the atmosphere does not affect the ocean's alkalinity.
It does lead to a reduction in pH value though (termed ocean acidification).
The ocean waters contain many chemical elements as dissolved ions.
Elements dissolved in ocean waters have a wide range of concentrations.
Some elements have very high concentrations of several grams per liter, such as sodium and chloride, together making up the majority of ocean salts.
Other elements, such as iron, are present at tiny concentrations of just a few nanograms (10−9 grams) per liter.
The concentration of any element depends on its rate of supply to the ocean and its rate of removal.
Elements enter the ocean from rivers, the atmosphere and hydrothermal vents.
Elements are removed from ocean water by sinking and becoming buried in sediments or evaporating to the atmosphere in the case of water and some gases.
By estimating the residence time of an element, oceanographers examine the balance of input and removal.
Residence time is the average time the element would spend dissolved in the ocean before it is removed.
Heavily abundant elements in ocean water such as sodium, have high input rates.
This reflects high abundance in rocks and rapid rock weathering, paired with very slow removal from the ocean due to sodium ions being comparatively unreactive and highly soluble.
In contrast, other elements such as iron and aluminium are abundant in rocks but very insoluble, meaning that inputs to the ocean are low and removal is rapid.
These cycles represent part of the major global cycle of elements that has gone on since the Earth first formed.
The residence times of the very abundant elements in the ocean are estimated to be millions of years, while for highly reactive and insoluble elements, residence times are only hundreds of years.
A few elements such as nitrogen, phosphorus, iron, and potassium essential for life, are major components of biological material, and are commonly known as "nutrients".
Nitrate and phosphate have ocean residence times of 10,000 and 69,000 years, respectively, while potassium is a much more abundant ion in the ocean with a residence time of 12 million years.
The biological cycling of these elements means that this represents a continuous removal process from the ocean's water column as degrading organic material sinks to the ocean floor as sediment.
Phosphate from intensive agriculture and untreated sewage is transported via runoff to rivers and coastal zones to the ocean where it is metabolized.
Eventually, it sinks to the ocean floor and is no longer available to humans as a commercial resource.
Production of rock phosphate, an essential ingredient in inorganic fertilizer, is a slow geological process that occurs in some of the world's ocean sediments, rendering mineable sedimentary apatite (phosphate) a non-renewable resource (see peak phosphorus).
This continual net deposition loss of non-renewable phosphate from human activities, may become a resource issue for fertilizer production and food security in future.
Life within the ocean evolved 3 billion years prior to life on land.
Both the depth and the distance from shore strongly influence the biodiversity of the plants and animals present in each region.
Animals: most animal phyla have species that inhabit the ocean, including many that are found only in marine environments such as sponges, Cnidaria (such as corals and jellyfish), comb jellies, Brachiopods, and Echinoderms (such as sea urchins and sea stars).
Many other familiar animal groups primarily live in the ocean, including cephalopods (includes octopus and squid), crustaceans (includes lobsters, crabs, and shrimp), fish, sharks, cetaceans (includes whales, dolphins, and porpoises).
In addition, many land animals have adapted to living a major part of their life on the oceans.
For instance, seabirds are a diverse group of birds that have adapted to a life mainly on the oceans.
They feed on marine animals and spend most of their lifetime on water, many going on land only for breeding.
Other birds that have adapted to oceans as their living space are penguins, seagulls and pelicans.
Seven species of turtles, the sea turtles, also spend most of their time in the oceans.
Algae: algae is a "catch-all" term to include many photosynthetic, single-celled eukaryotes, such as green algae, diatoms, and dinoflagellates, but also multicellular algae, such as some red algae (including organisms like Pyropia, which is the source of the edible nori seaweed), and brown algae (including organisms like kelp).
The ocean has been linked to human activity throughout history.
These activities serve a wide variety of purposes, including navigation and exploration, naval warfare, travel, shipping and trade, food production (e.
Many of the world's goods are moved by ship between the world's seaports.
Large quantities of goods are transported across the ocean, especially across the Atlantic and around the Pacific Rim.
Many types of cargo including manufactured goods, are typically transported in standard sized, lockable containers that are loaded on purpose-built container ships at dedicated terminals.
Containerization greatly boosted the efficiency and reduced the cost of shipping products by sea.
This was a major factor in the rise of globalization and exponential increases in international trade in the mid-to-late 20th century.
Oceans are also the major supply source for the fishing industry.
Some of the major harvests are shrimp, fish, crabs, and lobster.
The biggest global commercial fishery is for anchovies, Alaska pollock and tuna.
A report by FAO in 2020 stated that "in 2017, 34 percent of the fish stocks of the world's marine fisheries were classified as overfished".
Fish and other fishery products from both wild fisheries and aquaculture are among the most widely consumed sources of protein and other essential nutrients.
Data in 2017 showed that "fish consumption accounted for 17 percent of the global population's intake of animal proteins".
To fulfill this need, coastal countries have exploited marine resources in their exclusive economic zone.
Fishing vessels are increasingly venturing out to exploit stocks in international waters.
The ocean has a vast amount of energy carried by ocean waves, tides, salinity differences, and ocean temperature differences which can be harnessed to generate electricity.
Forms of sustainable marine energy include tidal power, ocean thermal energy and wave power.
Offshore wind power is captured by wind turbines placed out on the ocean; it has the advantage that wind speeds are higher than on land, though wind farms are more costly to construct offshore.
There are large deposits of petroleum, as oil and natural gas, in rocks beneath the ocean floor.
Offshore platforms and drilling rigs extract the oil or gas and store it for transport to land.
It stresses freedom to navigate the oceans and disapproves of war fought in international waters.
Today, this concept is enshrined in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).
The International Maritime Organization (IMO), which was ratified in 1958, is mainly responsible for maritime safety, liability and compensation, and has held some conventions on marine pollution related to shipping incidents.
Ocean governance is the conduct of the policy, actions and affairs regarding the world's oceans.
Human activities affect marine life and marine habitats through many negative influences, such as marine pollution (including marine debris and microplastics), overfishing, ocean acidification, and other effects of climate change on oceans.
Ocean protection serves to safeguard the ecosystems in the oceans upon which humans depend.
Protecting these ecosystems from threats is a major component of environmental protection.
One of protective measures is the creation and enforcement of marine protected areas (MPAs).
Marine protection may need to be considered within a national, regional and international context.
Other measures include supply chain transparency requirement policies, policies to prevent marine pollution, ecosystem-assistance (e.
There is also the protection of marine resources and components whose extraction or disturbance would cause substantial harm, engagement of broader publics and impacted communities, and the development of ocean clean-up projects (removal of marine plastic pollution).
Examples of the latter include Clean Oceans International and The Ocean Cleanup.
In 2021, 43 expert scientists published the first scientific framework version that – via integration, review, clarifications and standardization – enables the evaluation of levels of protection of marine protected areas and can serve as a guide for any subsequent efforts to improve, plan and monitor marine protection quality and extents.
Examples are the efforts towards the 30%-protection-goal of the "Global Deal For Nature" and the UN's Sustainable Development Goal 14 ("life below water").
In March 2023 a High Seas Treaty was signed.
It is legally binding.
The main achievement is the new possibility to create marine protected areas in international waters.
By doing so the agreement now makes it possible to protect 30% of the oceans by 2030 (part of the 30 by 30 target).
The treaty has articles regarding the principle "polluter-pays", and different impacts of human activities including areas beyond the national jurisdiction of the countries making those activities.
The agreement was adopted by the 193 United Nations Member States.
Thermodynamics is a branch of physics that deals with heat, work, and temperature, and their relation to energy, entropy, and the physical properties of matter and radiation.
The behavior of these quantities is governed by the four laws of thermodynamics, which convey a quantitative description using measurable macroscopic physical quantities but may be explained in terms of microscopic constituents by statistical mechanics.
Thermodynamics applies to various topics in science and engineering, especially physical chemistry, biochemistry, chemical engineering, and mechanical engineering, as well as other complex fields such as meteorology.
Historically, thermodynamics developed out of a desire to increase the efficiency of early steam engines, particularly through the work of French physicist Sadi Carnot (1824).
Scots-Irish physicist Lord Kelvin was the first to formulate a concise definition of thermodynamics in 1854 which stated, "Thermo-dynamics is the subject of the relation of heat to forces acting between contiguous parts of bodies, and the relation of heat to electrical agency.
His most important paper, "On the Moving Force of Heat", published in 1850, first stated the second law of thermodynamics.
In 1865 he named the concept of entropy.
In 1870 he introduced the virial theorem, which applied to heat.
The initial application of thermodynamics to mechanical heat engines was quickly extended to the study of chemical compounds and chemical reactions.
Chemical thermodynamics studies the nature of the role of entropy in the process of chemical reactions and has provided the bulk of expansion and knowledge of the field.
Other formulations of thermodynamics emerged.
Statistical thermodynamics, or statistical mechanics, concerns itself with statistical predictions of the collective motion of particles from their microscopic behavior.
In 1909, Constantin Carathéodory presented a purely mathematical approach in an axiomatic formulation, a description often referred to as geometrical thermodynamics.
A description of any thermodynamic system employs the four laws of thermodynamics that form an axiomatic basis.
The first law specifies that energy can be transferred between physical systems as heat, as work, and with the transfer of matter.
The second law defines the existence of a quantity called entropy, which describes the direction, thermodynamically, that a system can evolve and quantifies the state of order of a system and which can be used to quantify the useful work that can be extracted from the system.
In thermodynamics, interactions between large ensembles of objects are studied and categorized.
Central to this are the concepts of the thermodynamic system and its surroundings.
A system is composed of particles, whose average motions define its properties, and those properties are in turn related to one another through equations of state.
Properties can be combined to express internal energy and thermodynamic potentials, which are useful for determining conditions for equilibrium and spontaneous processes.
With these tools, thermodynamics can be used to describe how systems respond to changes in their environment.
This can be applied to a wide variety of topics in science and engineering, such as engines, phase transitions, chemical reactions, transport phenomena, and even black holes.
The results of thermodynamics are essential for other fields of physics and for chemistry, chemical engineering, corrosion engineering, aerospace engineering, mechanical engineering, cell biology, biomedical engineering, materials science, and economics, to name a few.
This article is focused mainly on classical thermodynamics which primarily studies systems in thermodynamic equilibrium.
Non-equilibrium thermodynamics is often treated as an extension of the classical treatment, but statistical mechanics has brought many advances to that field.
The history of thermodynamics as a scientific discipline generally begins with Otto von Guericke who, in 1650, built and designed the world's first vacuum pump and demonstrated a vacuum using his Magdeburg hemispheres.
Guericke was driven to make a vacuum in order to disprove Aristotle's long-held supposition that 'nature abhors a vacuum'.
Shortly after Guericke, the Anglo-Irish physicist and chemist Robert Boyle had learned of Guericke's designs and, in 1656, in coordination with English scientist Robert Hooke, built an air pump.
Using this pump, Boyle and Hooke noticed a correlation between pressure, temperature, and volume.
In time, Boyle's Law was formulated, which states that pressure and volume are inversely proportional.
Then, in 1679, based on these concepts, an associate of Boyle's named Denis Papin built a steam digester, which was a closed vessel with a tightly fitting lid that confined steam until a high pressure was generated.
Later designs implemented a steam release valve that kept the machine from exploding.
By watching the valve rhythmically move up and down, Papin conceived of the idea of a piston and a cylinder engine.
He did not, however, follow through with his design.
Nevertheless, in 1697, based on Papin's designs, engineer Thomas Savery built the first engine, followed by Thomas Newcomen in 1712.
Although these early engines were crude and inefficient, they attracted the attention of the leading scientists of the time.
The fundamental concepts of heat capacity and latent heat, which were necessary for the development of thermodynamics, were developed by Professor Joseph Black at the University of Glasgow, where James Watt was employed as an instrument maker.
Black and Watt performed experiments together, but it was Watt who conceived the idea of the external condenser which resulted in a large increase in steam engine efficiency.
Drawing on all the previous work led Sadi Carnot, the "father of thermodynamics", to publish Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire (1824), a discourse on heat, power, energy and engine efficiency.
The book outlined the basic energetic relations between the Carnot engine, the Carnot cycle, and motive power.
It marked the start of thermodynamics as a modern science.
The first thermodynamic textbook was written in 1859 by William Rankine, originally trained as a physicist and a civil and mechanical engineering professor at the University of Glasgow.
The first and second laws of thermodynamics emerged simultaneously in the 1850s, primarily out of the works of William Rankine, Rudolf Clausius, and William Thomson (Lord Kelvin).
The foundations of statistical thermodynamics were set out by physicists such as James Clerk Maxwell, Ludwig Boltzmann, Max Planck, Rudolf Clausius and J.
Clausius, who first stated the basic ideas of the second law in his paper "On the Moving Force of Heat", published in 1850, and is called "one of the founding fathers of thermodynamics", introduced the concept of entropy in 1865.
During the years 1873–76 the American mathematical physicist Josiah Willard Gibbs published a series of three papers, the most famous being On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances, in which he showed how thermodynamic processes, including chemical reactions, could be graphically analyzed, by studying the energy, entropy, volume, temperature and pressure of the thermodynamic system in such a manner, one can determine if a process would occur spontaneously.
Also Pierre Duhem in the 19th century wrote about chemical thermodynamics.
During the early 20th century, chemists such as Gilbert N.
Lewis, Merle Randall, and E.
Guggenheim applied the mathematical methods of Gibbs to the analysis of chemical processes.
Thermodynamics has an intricate etymology.
By a surface-level analysis, the word consists of two parts that can be traced back to Ancient Greek.
Firstly, thermo- ("of heat"; used in words such as thermometer) can be traced back to the root θέρμη therme, meaning "heat".
Secondly, the word dynamics ("science of force [or power]") can be traced back to the root δύναμις dynamis, meaning "power".
In 1849, the adjective thermo-dynamic is used by William Thomson.
In 1854, the noun thermo-dynamics is used by Thomson and William Rankine to represent the science of generalized heat engines.
Pierre Perrot claims that the term thermodynamics was coined by James Joule in 1858 to designate the science of relations between heat and power, however, Joule never used that term, but used instead the term perfect thermo-dynamic engine in reference to Thomson's 1849 phraseology.
The study of thermodynamic systems has developed into several related branches, each using a different fundamental model as a theoretical or experimental basis, or applying the principles to varying types of systems.
Classical thermodynamics is the description of the states of thermodynamic systems at near-equilibrium, that uses macroscopic, measurable properties.
It is used to model exchanges of energy, work and heat based on the laws of thermodynamics.
The qualifier classical reflects the fact that it represents the first level of understanding of the subject as it developed in the 19th century and describes the changes of a system in terms of macroscopic empirical (large scale, and measurable) parameters.
A microscopic interpretation of these concepts was later provided by the development of statistical mechanics.
Statistical mechanics, also known as statistical thermodynamics, emerged with the development of atomic and molecular theories in the late 19th century and early 20th century, and supplemented classical thermodynamics with an interpretation of the microscopic interactions between individual particles or quantum-mechanical states.
This field relates the microscopic properties of individual atoms and molecules to the macroscopic, bulk properties of materials that can be observed on the human scale, thereby explaining classical thermodynamics as a natural result of statistics, classical mechanics, and quantum theory at the microscopic level.
Chemical thermodynamics is the study of the interrelation of energy with chemical reactions or with a physical change of state within the confines of the laws of thermodynamics.
The primary objective of chemical thermodynamics is to determine the spontaneity of a given transformation.
Equilibrium thermodynamics is the study of transfers of matter and energy in systems or bodies that, by agencies in their surroundings, can be driven from one state of thermodynamic equilibrium to another.
The term 'thermodynamic equilibrium' indicates a state of balance, in which all macroscopic flows are zero; in the case of the simplest systems or bodies, their intensive properties are homogeneous, and their pressures are perpendicular to their boundaries.
In an equilibrium state there are no unbalanced potentials, or driving forces, between macroscopically distinct parts of the system.
A central aim in equilibrium thermodynamics is: given a system in a well-defined initial equilibrium state, and given its surroundings, and given its constitutive walls, to calculate what will be the final equilibrium state of the system after a specified thermodynamic operation has changed its walls or surroundings.
Non-equilibrium thermodynamics is a branch of thermodynamics that deals with systems that are not in thermodynamic equilibrium.
Most systems found in nature are not in thermodynamic equilibrium because they are not in stationary states, and are continuously and discontinuously subject to flux of matter and energy to and from other systems.
The thermodynamic study of non-equilibrium systems requires more general concepts than are dealt with by equilibrium thermodynamics.
Many natural systems still today remain beyond the scope of currently known macroscopic thermodynamic methods.
Thermodynamics is principally based on a set of four laws which are universally valid when applied to systems that fall within the constraints implied by each.
In the various theoretical descriptions of thermodynamics these laws may be expressed in seemingly differing forms, but the most prominent formulations are the following.
The zeroth law of thermodynamics states: If two systems are each in thermal equilibrium with a third, they are also in thermal equilibrium with each other.
This statement implies that thermal equilibrium is an equivalence relation on the set of thermodynamic systems under consideration.
Systems are said to be in equilibrium if the small, random exchanges between them (e.
Brownian motion) do not lead to a net change in energy.
This law is tacitly assumed in every measurement of temperature.
Thus, if one seeks to decide whether two bodies are at the same temperature, it is not necessary to bring them into contact and measure any changes of their observable properties in time.
The law provides an empirical definition of temperature, and justification for the construction of practical thermometers.
The zeroth law was not initially recognized as a separate law of thermodynamics, as its basis in thermodynamical equilibrium was implied in the other laws.
The first, second, and third laws had been explicitly stated already, and found common acceptance in the physics community before the importance of the zeroth law for the definition of temperature was realized.
As it was impractical to renumber the other laws, it was named the zeroth law.
Adapted for thermodynamics, this law is an expression of the principle of conservation of energy, which states that energy can be transformed (changed from one form to another), but cannot be created or destroyed.
Internal energy is a principal property of the thermodynamic state, while heat and work are modes of energy transfer by which a process may change this state.
A change of internal energy of a system may be achieved by any combination of heat added or removed and work performed on or by the system.
As a function of state, the internal energy does not depend on the manner, or on the path through intermediate steps, by which the system arrived at its state.
A traditional version of the second law of thermodynamics states: Heat does not spontaneously flow from a colder body to a hotter body.
The second law refers to a system of matter and radiation, initially with inhomogeneities in temperature, pressure, chemical potential, and other intensive properties, that are due to internal 'constraints', or impermeable rigid walls, within it, or to externally imposed forces.
The law observes that, when the system is isolated from the outside world and from those forces, there is a definite thermodynamic quantity, its entropy, that increases as the constraints are removed, eventually reaching a maximum value at thermodynamic equilibrium, when the inhomogeneities practically vanish.
For systems that are initially far from thermodynamic equilibrium, though several have been proposed, there is known no general physical principle that determines the rates of approach to thermodynamic equilibrium, and thermodynamics does not deal with such rates.
The many versions of the second law all express the general irreversibility of the transitions involved in systems approaching thermodynamic equilibrium.
In macroscopic thermodynamics, the second law is a basic observation applicable to any actual thermodynamic process; in statistical thermodynamics, the second law is postulated to be a consequence of molecular chaos.
The third law of thermodynamics states: As the temperature of a system approaches absolute zero, all processes cease and the entropy of the system approaches a minimum value.
This law of thermodynamics is a statistical law of nature regarding entropy and the impossibility of reaching absolute zero of temperature.
This law provides an absolute reference point for the determination of entropy.
The entropy determined relative to this point is the absolute entropy.
Alternative definitions include "the entropy of all systems and of all states of a system is smallest at absolute zero," or equivalently "it is impossible to reach the absolute zero of temperature by any finite number of processes".
Absolute zero, at which all activity would stop if it were possible to achieve, is −273.
An important concept in thermodynamics is the thermodynamic system, which is a precisely defined region of the universe under study.
Everything in the universe except the system is called the surroundings.
A system is separated from the remainder of the universe by a boundary which may be a physical or notional, but serve to confine the system to a finite volume.
Segments of the boundary are often described as walls; they have respective defined 'permeabilities'.
Transfers of energy as work, or as heat, or of matter, between the system and the surroundings, take place through the walls, according to their respective permeabilities.
Matter or energy that pass across the boundary so as to effect a change in the internal energy of the system need to be accounted for in the energy balance equation.
The volume contained by the walls can be the region surrounding a single atom resonating energy, such as Max Planck defined in 1900; it can be a body of steam or air in a steam engine, such as Sadi Carnot defined in 1824.
The system could also be just one nuclide (i.
When a looser viewpoint is adopted, and the requirement of thermodynamic equilibrium is dropped, the system can be the body of a tropical cyclone, such as Kerry Emanuel theorized in 1986 in the field of atmospheric thermodynamics, or the event horizon of a black hole.
Boundaries are of four types: fixed, movable, real, and imaginary.
For example, in an engine, a fixed boundary means the piston is locked at its position, within which a constant volume process might occur.
If the piston is allowed to move that boundary is movable while the cylinder and cylinder head boundaries are fixed.
For closed systems, boundaries are real while for open systems boundaries are often imaginary.
In the case of a jet engine, a fixed imaginary boundary might be assumed at the intake of the engine, fixed boundaries along the surface of the case and a second fixed imaginary boundary across the exhaust nozzle.
As time passes in an isolated system, internal differences of pressures, densities, and temperatures tend to even out.
A system in which all equalizing processes have gone to completion is said to be in a state of thermodynamic equilibrium.
Once in thermodynamic equilibrium, a system's properties are, by definition, unchanging in time.
Systems in equilibrium are much simpler and easier to understand than are systems which are not in equilibrium.
Often, when analysing a dynamic thermodynamic process, the simplifying assumption is made that each intermediate state in the process is at equilibrium, producing thermodynamic processes which develop so slowly as to allow each intermediate step to be an equilibrium state and are said to be reversible processes.
When a system is at equilibrium under a given set of conditions, it is said to be in a definite thermodynamic state.
The state of the system can be described by a number of state quantities that do not depend on the process by which the system arrived at its state.
They are called intensive variables or extensive variables according to how they change when the size of the system changes.
The properties of the system can be described by an equation of state which specifies the relationship between these variables.
State may be thought of as the instantaneous quantitative description of a system with a set number of variables held constant.
A thermodynamic process may be defined as the energetic evolution of a thermodynamic system proceeding from an initial state to a final state.
It can be described by process quantities.
Typically, each thermodynamic process is distinguished from other processes in energetic character according to what parameters, such as temperature, pressure, or volume, etc.
There are two types of thermodynamic instruments, the meter and the reservoir.
A thermodynamic meter is any device which measures any parameter of a thermodynamic system.
In some cases, the thermodynamic parameter is actually defined in terms of an idealized measuring instrument.
For example, the zeroth law states that if two bodies are in thermal equilibrium with a third body, they are also in thermal equilibrium with each other.
This principle, as noted by James Maxwell in 1872, asserts that it is possible to measure temperature.
An idealized thermometer is a sample of an ideal gas at constant pressure.
From the ideal gas law pV=nRT, the volume of such a sample can be used as an indicator of temperature; in this manner it defines temperature.
Although pressure is defined mechanically, a pressure-measuring device, called a barometer may also be constructed from a sample of an ideal gas held at a constant temperature.
A calorimeter is a device which is used to measure and define the internal energy of a system.
A thermodynamic reservoir is a system which is so large that its state parameters are not appreciably altered when it is brought into contact with the system of interest.
When the reservoir is brought into contact with the system, the system is brought into equilibrium with the reservoir.
For example, a pressure reservoir is a system at a particular pressure, which imposes that pressure upon the system to which it is mechanically connected.
The Earth's atmosphere is often used as a pressure reservoir.
The ocean can act as temperature reservoir when used to cool power plants.
The central concept of thermodynamics is that of energy, the ability to do work.
By the First Law, the total energy of a system and its surroundings is conserved.
Energy may be transferred into a system by heating, compression, or addition of matter, and extracted from a system by cooling, expansion, or extraction of matter.
In mechanics, for example, energy transfer equals the product of the force applied to a body and the resulting displacement.
Conjugate variables are pairs of thermodynamic concepts, with the first being akin to a "force" applied to some thermodynamic system, the second being akin to the resulting "displacement", and the product of the two equaling the amount of energy transferred.
Chemical potential–particle number (material parameters).
Thermodynamic potentials are different quantitative measures of the stored energy in a system.
Potentials are used to measure the energy changes in systems as they evolve from an initial state to a final state.
The potential used depends on the constraints of the system, such as constant temperature or pressure.
For example, the Helmholtz and Gibbs energies are the energies available in a system to do useful work when the temperature and volume or the pressure and temperature are fixed, respectively.
Thermodynamic potentials cannot be measured in laboratories, but can be computed using molecular thermodynamics.
Thermodynamic potentials can be derived from the energy balance equation applied to a thermodynamic system.
Other thermodynamic potentials can also be obtained through Legendre transformation.
Axiomatic thermodynamics is a mathematical discipline that aims to describe thermodynamics in terms of rigorous axioms, for example by finding a mathematically rigorous way to express the familiar laws of thermodynamics.
The first attempt at an axiomatic theory of thermodynamics was Constantin Carathéodory's 1909 work Investigations on the Foundations of Thermodynamics, which made use of Pfaffian systems and the concept of adiabatic accessibility, a notion that was introduced by Carathéodory himself.
In this formulation, thermodynamic concepts such as heat, entropy, and temperature are derived from quantities that are more directly measurable.
Theories that came after, differed in the sense that they made assumptions regarding thermodynamic processes with arbitrary initial and final states, as opposed to considering only neighboring states.
Goldstein, Martin & Inge F.
The Refrigerator and the Universe.
Harvard University Press.
ISBN 978-0-674-75325-9.
A nontechnical introduction, good on historical and interpretive matters.
Kazakov, Andrei; Muzny, Chris D.
Journal of Research of the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
The Collected Works of J.
Willard Gibbs Thermodynamics.
New York: Longmans, Green and Co.
Modern thermodynamics by the methods of Willard Gibbs.
London: Methuen & co.
The Principles of Chemical Equilibrium: With Applications in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering.
London: Cambridge University Press.
The Chemical Thermodynamics of Organic Compounds.
London: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Thermodynamics: Textbook.
Petersburg: Lan publishing house.
ISBN 978-5-8114-1003-3.
Wiley & Sons, Incorporated.
Thermodynamics of Biochemical Reactions.
Biochemical Thermodynamics: Applications of Mathematica.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
ISBN 978-0-471-75798-6.
Molecular Driving Forces: Statistical Thermodynamics in Biology, Chemistry, Physics, and Nanoscience.
ISBN 978-0-8153-4430-8.
Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics: An Integrated Approach.
Cambridge University Press.
Biomolecular Thermodynamics: From Theory to Applications.
ISBN 978-1-4398-0019-5.
Bejan, Adrian (2016).
Advanced Engineering Thermodynamics (4 ed.
ISBN 978-1-119-05209-8.
Thermodynamics – an Engineering Approach.
ISBN 978-0-07-238332-4.
Dunning-Davies, Jeremy (1997).
Concise Thermodynamics: Principles and Applications.
ISBN 978-1-8985-6315-0.
Kroemer, Herbert & Kittel, Charles (1980).
ISBN 978-0-7167-1088-2.
Callendar, Hugh Longbourne (1911).
Encyclopædia Britannica.
In physics, electromagnetism is an interaction that occurs between particles with electric charge via electromagnetic fields.
The electromagnetic force is one of the four fundamental forces of nature.
It is the dominant force in the interactions of atoms and molecules.
Electromagnetism can be thought of as a combination of electrostatics and magnetism, which are distinct but closely intertwined phenomena.
Electromagnetic forces occur between any two charged particles.
Electric forces cause an attraction between particles with opposite charges and repulsion between particles with the same charge, while magnetism is an interaction that occurs between charged particles in relative motion.
These two forces are described in terms of electromagnetic fields.
Macroscopic charged objects are described in terms of Coulomb's law for electricity and Ampère's force law for magnetism; the Lorentz force describes microscopic charged particles.
The electromagnetic force is responsible for many of the chemical and physical phenomena observed in daily life.
The electrostatic attraction between atomic nuclei and their electrons holds atoms together.
Electric forces also allow different atoms to combine into molecules, including the macromolecules such as proteins that form the basis of life.
Meanwhile, magnetic interactions between the spin and angular momentum magnetic moments of electrons also play a role in chemical reactivity; such relationships are studied in spin chemistry.
Electromagnetism also plays several crucial roles in modern technology: electrical energy production, transformation and distribution; light, heat, and sound production and detection; fiber optic and wireless communication; sensors; computation; electrolysis; electroplating; and mechanical motors and actuators.
Electromagnetism has been studied since ancient times.
Many ancient civilizations, including the Greeks and the Mayans, created wide-ranging theories to explain lightning, static electricity, and the attraction between magnetized pieces of iron ore.
However, it was not until the late 18th century that scientists began to develop a mathematical basis for understanding the nature of electromagnetic interactions.
In the 18th and 19th centuries, prominent scientists and mathematicians such as Coulomb, Gauss and Faraday developed namesake laws which helped to explain the formation and interaction of electromagnetic fields.
This process culminated in the 1860s with the discovery of Maxwell's equations, a set of four partial differential equations which provide a complete description of classical electromagnetic fields.
Maxwell's equations provided a sound mathematical basis for the relationships between electricity and magnetism that scientists had been exploring for centuries, and predicted the existence of self-sustaining electromagnetic waves.
Maxwell postulated that such waves make up visible light, which was later shown to be true.
Gamma-rays, x-rays, ultraviolet, visible, infrared radiation, microwaves and radio waves were all determined to be electromagnetic radiation differing only in their range of frequencies.
In the modern era, scientists continue to refine the theory of electromagnetism to account for the effects of modern physics, including quantum mechanics and relativity.
The theoretical implications of electromagnetism, particularly the requirement that observations remain consistent when viewed from various moving frames of reference (relativistic electromagnetism) and the establishment of the speed of light based on properties of the medium of propagation (permeability and permittivity), helped inspire Einstein's theory of special relativity in 1905.
Quantum electrodynamics (QED) modifies Maxwell's equations to be consistent with the quantized nature of matter.
In QED, changes in the electromagnetic field are expressed in terms of discrete excitations, particles known as photons, the quanta of light.
Investigation into electromagnetic phenomena began about 5,000 years ago.
There is evidence that the ancient Chinese, Mayan, and potentially even Egyptian civilizations knew that the naturally magnetic mineral magnetite had attractive properties, and many incorporated it into their art and architecture.
Ancient people were also aware of lightning and static electricity, although they had no idea of the mechanisms behind these phenomena.
The Greek philosopher Thales of Miletus discovered around 600 B.
Thales also experimented with the ability of magnetic rocks to attract one other, and hypothesized that this phenomenon might be connected to the attractive power of amber, foreshadowing the deep connections between electricity and magnetism that would be discovered over 2,000 years later.
Despite all this investigation, ancient civilizations had no understanding of the mathematical basis of electromagnetism, and often analyzed its impacts through the lens of religion rather than science (lightning, for instance, was considered to be a creation of the gods in many cultures).
Electricity and magnetism were originally considered to be two separate forces.
This view changed with the publication of James Clerk Maxwell's 1873 A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism in which the interactions of positive and negative charges were shown to be mediated by one force.
Electric charges attract or repel one another with a force inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them: opposite charges attract, like charges repel.
Magnetic poles (or states of polarization at individual points) attract or repel one another in a manner similar to positive and negative charges and always exist as pairs: every north pole is yoked to a south pole.
An electric current inside a wire creates a corresponding circumferential magnetic field outside the wire.
Its direction (clockwise or counter-clockwise) depends on the direction of the current in the wire.
A current is induced in a loop of wire when it is moved toward or away from a magnetic field, or a magnet is moved towards or away from it; the direction of current depends on that of the movement.
In April 1820, Hans Christian Ørsted observed that an electrical current in a wire caused a nearby compass needle to move.
At the time of discovery, Ørsted did not suggest any satisfactory explanation of the phenomenon, nor did he try to represent the phenomenon in a mathematical framework.
However, three months later he began more intensive investigations.
Soon thereafter he published his findings, proving that an electric current produces a magnetic field as it flows through a wire.
The CGS unit of magnetic induction (oersted) is named in honor of his contributions to the field of electromagnetism.
His findings resulted in intensive research throughout the scientific community in electrodynamics.
They influenced French physicist André-Marie Ampère's developments of a single mathematical form to represent the magnetic forces between current-carrying conductors.
Ørsted's discovery also represented a major step toward a unified concept of energy.
This unification, which was observed by Michael Faraday, extended by James Clerk Maxwell, and partially reformulated by Oliver Heaviside and Heinrich Hertz, is one of the key accomplishments of 19th-century mathematical physics.
It has had far-reaching consequences, one of which was the understanding of the nature of light.
Unlike what was proposed by the electromagnetic theory of that time, light and other electromagnetic waves are at present seen as taking the form of quantized, self-propagating oscillatory electromagnetic field disturbances called photons.
Different frequencies of oscillation give rise to the different forms of electromagnetic radiation, from radio waves at the lowest frequencies, to visible light at intermediate frequencies, to gamma rays at the highest frequencies.
Ørsted was not the only person to examine the relationship between electricity and magnetism.
In 1802, Gian Domenico Romagnosi, an Italian legal scholar, deflected a magnetic needle using a Voltaic pile.
The factual setup of the experiment is not completely clear, nor if current flowed across the needle or not.
An account of the discovery was published in 1802 in an Italian newspaper, but it was largely overlooked by the contemporary scientific community, because Romagnosi seemingly did not belong to this community.
An earlier (1735), and often neglected, connection between electricity and magnetism was reported by a Dr.
The account stated:A tradesman at Wakefield in Yorkshire, having put up a great number of knives and forks in a large box .
The owner emptying the box on a counter where some nails lay, the persons who took up the knives, that lay on the nails, observed that the knives took up the nails.
On this the whole number was tried, and found to do the same, and that, to such a degree as to take up large nails, packing needles, and other iron things of considerable weight .
Whittaker suggested in 1910 that this particular event was responsible for lightning to be "credited with the power of magnetizing steel; and it was doubtless this which led Franklin in 1751 to attempt to magnetize a sewing-needle by means of the discharge of Leyden jars.
The electromagnetic force is the second strongest of the four known fundamental forces and has unlimited range.
All other forces, known as non-fundamental forces.
At high energy, the weak force and electromagnetic force are unified as a single interaction called the electroweak interaction.
Most of the forces involved in interactions between atoms are explained by electromagnetic forces between electrically charged atomic nuclei and electrons.
The electromagnetic force is also involved in all forms of chemical phenomena.
Electromagnetism explains how materials carry momentum despite being composed of individual particles and empty space.
The forces we experience when "pushing" or "pulling" ordinary material objects result from intermolecular forces between individual molecules in our bodies and in the objects.
The effective forces generated by the momentum of electrons' movement is a necessary part of understanding atomic and intermolecular interactions.
As electrons move between interacting atoms, they carry momentum with them.
As a collection of electrons becomes more confined, their minimum momentum necessarily increases due to the Pauli exclusion principle.
The behavior of matter at the molecular scale, including its density, is determined by the balance between the electromagnetic force and the force generated by the exchange of momentum carried by the electrons themselves.
In 1600, William Gilbert proposed, in his De Magnete, that electricity and magnetism, while both capable of causing attraction and repulsion of objects, were distinct effects.
Mariners had noticed that lightning strikes had the ability to disturb a compass needle.
The link between lightning and electricity was not confirmed until Benjamin Franklin's proposed experiments in 1752 were conducted on 10 May 1752 by Thomas-François Dalibard of France using a 40-foot-tall (12 m) iron rod instead of a kite and he successfully extracted electrical sparks from a cloud.
One of the first to discover and publish a link between human-made electric current and magnetism was Gian Romagnosi, who in 1802 noticed that connecting a wire across a voltaic pile deflected a nearby compass needle.
However, the effect did not become widely known until 1820, when Ørsted performed a similar experiment.
Ørsted's work influenced Ampère to conduct further experiments, which eventually gave rise to a new area of physics: electrodynamics.
By determining a force law for the interaction between elements of electric current, Ampère placed the subject on a solid mathematical foundation.
A theory of electromagnetism, known as classical electromagnetism, was developed by several physicists during the period between 1820 and 1873, when James Clerk Maxwell's treatise was published, which unified previous developments into a single theory, proposing that light was an electromagnetic wave propagating in the luminiferous ether.
In classical electromagnetism, the behavior of the electromagnetic field is described by a set of equations known as Maxwell's equations, and the electromagnetic force is given by the Lorentz force law.
One of the peculiarities of classical electromagnetism is that it is difficult to reconcile with classical mechanics, but it is compatible with special relativity.
According to Maxwell's equations, the speed of light in vacuum is a universal constant that is dependent only on the electrical permittivity and magnetic permeability of free space.
This violates Galilean invariance, a long-standing cornerstone of classical mechanics.
One way to reconcile the two theories (electromagnetism and classical mechanics) is to assume the existence of a luminiferous aether through which the light propagates.
However, subsequent experimental efforts failed to detect the presence of the aether.
After important contributions of Hendrik Lorentz and Henri Poincaré, in 1905, Albert Einstein solved the problem with the introduction of special relativity, which replaced classical kinematics with a new theory of kinematics compatible with classical electromagnetism.
In addition, relativity theory implies that in moving frames of reference, a magnetic field transforms to a field with a nonzero electric component and conversely, a moving electric field transforms to a nonzero magnetic component, thus firmly showing that the phenomena are two sides of the same coin.
Hence the term "electromagnetism".
Today few problems in electromagnetism remain unsolved.
These include: the lack of magnetic monopoles, Abraham–Minkowski controversy, the location in space of the electromagnetic field energy, and the mechanism by which some organisms can sense electric and magnetic fields.
The Maxwell equations are linear, in that a change in the sources (the charges and currents) results in a proportional change of the fields.
Nonlinear dynamics can occur when electromagnetic fields couple to matter that follows nonlinear dynamical laws.
This is studied, for example, in the subject of magnetohydrodynamics, which combines Maxwell theory with the Navier–Stokes equations.
Another branch of electromagnetism dealing with nonlinearity is nonlinear optics.
In the electromagnetic CGS system, electric current is a fundamental quantity defined via Ampère's law and takes the permeability as a dimensionless quantity (relative permeability) whose value in vacuum is unity.
As a consequence, the square of the speed of light appears explicitly in some of the equations interrelating quantities in this system.
Formulas for physical laws of electromagnetism (such as Maxwell's equations) need to be adjusted depending on what system of units one uses.
This is because there is no one-to-one correspondence between electromagnetic units in SI and those in CGS, as is the case for mechanical units.
Furthermore, within CGS, there are several plausible choices of electromagnetic units, leading to different unit "sub-systems", including Gaussian, "ESU", "EMU", and Heaviside–Lorentz.
Among these choices, Gaussian units are the most common today, and in fact the phrase "CGS units" is often used to refer specifically to CGS-Gaussian units.
The theory of electromagnetism is used to understand and design electric circuits, magnetic circuits, and semiconductor devices.
Quantum mechanics is the fundamental physical theory that describes the behavior of matter and of light; its unusual characteristics typically occur at and below the scale of atoms.
It is the foundation of all quantum physics, which includes quantum chemistry, quantum biology, quantum field theory, quantum technology, and quantum information science.
Quantum mechanics can describe many systems that classical physics cannot.
Classical physics can describe many aspects of nature at an ordinary (macroscopic and (optical) microscopic) scale, however is insufficient for describing them at very small submicroscopic (atomic and subatomic) scales.
Classical mechanics can be derived from quantum mechanics as an approximation that is valid at ordinary scales.
Quantum systems have bound states that are quantized to discrete values of energy, momentum, angular momentum, and other quantities, in contrast to classical systems where these quantities can be measured continuously.
Measurements of quantum systems show characteristics of both particles and waves (wave–particle duality), and there are limits to how accurately the value of a physical quantity can be predicted prior to its measurement, given a complete set of initial conditions (the uncertainty principle).
Quantum mechanics arose gradually from theories to explain observations that could not be reconciled with classical physics, such as Max Planck's solution in 1900 to the black-body radiation problem, and the correspondence between energy and frequency in Albert Einstein's 1905 paper, which explained the photoelectric effect.
These early attempts to understand microscopic phenomena, now known as the "old quantum theory", led to the full development of quantum mechanics in the mid-1920s by Niels Bohr, Erwin Schrödinger, Werner Heisenberg, Max Born, Paul Dirac and others.
The modern theory is formulated in various specially developed mathematical formalisms.
In one of them, a mathematical entity called the wave function provides information, in the form of probability amplitudes, about what measurements of a particle's energy, momentum, and other physical properties may yield.
Quantum mechanics allows the calculation of properties and behaviour of physical systems.
It is typically applied to microscopic systems: molecules, atoms and subatomic particles.
It has been demonstrated to hold for complex molecules with thousands of atoms, but its application to human beings raises philosophical problems, such as Wigner's friend, and its application to the universe as a whole remains speculative.
Predictions of quantum mechanics have been verified experimentally to an extremely high degree of accuracy.
For example, the refinement of quantum mechanics for the interaction of light and matter, known as quantum electrodynamics (QED), has been shown to agree with experiment to within 1 part in 1012 when predicting the magnetic properties of an electron.
A fundamental feature of the theory is that it usually cannot predict with certainty what will happen, but only gives probabilities.
Mathematically, a probability is found by taking the square of the absolute value of a complex number, known as a probability amplitude.
This is known as the Born rule, named after physicist Max Born.
For example, a quantum particle like an electron can be described by a wave function, which associates to each point in space a probability amplitude.
Applying the Born rule to these amplitudes gives a probability density function for the position that the electron will be found to have when an experiment is performed to measure it.
This is the best the theory can do; it cannot say for certain where the electron will be found.
The Schrödinger equation relates the collection of probability amplitudes that pertain to one moment of time to the collection of probability amplitudes that pertain to another.
One consequence of the mathematical rules of quantum mechanics is a tradeoff in predictability between measurable quantities.
The most famous form of this uncertainty principle says that no matter how a quantum particle is prepared or how carefully experiments upon it are arranged, it is impossible to have a precise prediction for a measurement of its position and also at the same time for a measurement of its momentum.
Another consequence of the mathematical rules of quantum mechanics is the phenomenon of quantum interference, which is often illustrated with the double-slit experiment.
In the basic version of this experiment, a coherent light source, such as a laser beam, illuminates a plate pierced by two parallel slits, and the light passing through the slits is observed on a screen behind the plate.
The wave nature of light causes the light waves passing through the two slits to interfere, producing bright and dark bands on the screen – a result that would not be expected if light consisted of classical particles.
However, the light is always found to be absorbed at the screen at discrete points, as individual particles rather than waves; the interference pattern appears via the varying density of these particle hits on the screen.
Furthermore, versions of the experiment that include detectors at the slits find that each detected photon passes through one slit (as would a classical particle), and not through both slits (as would a wave).
However, such experiments demonstrate that particles do not form the interference pattern if one detects which slit they pass through.
This behavior is known as wave–particle duality.
In addition to light, electrons, atoms, and molecules are all found to exhibit the same dual behavior when fired towards a double slit.
Another non-classical phenomenon predicted by quantum mechanics is quantum tunnelling: a particle that goes up against a potential barrier can cross it, even if its kinetic energy is smaller than the maximum of the potential.
In classical mechanics this particle would be trapped.
Quantum tunnelling has several important consequences, enabling radioactive decay, nuclear fusion in stars, and applications such as scanning tunnelling microscopy, tunnel diode and tunnel field-effect transistor.
When quantum systems interact, the result can be the creation of quantum entanglement: their properties become so intertwined that a description of the whole solely in terms of the individual parts is no longer possible.
Erwin Schrödinger called entanglement ".
Quantum entanglement enables quantum computing and is part of quantum communication protocols, such as quantum key distribution and superdense coding.
Contrary to popular misconception, entanglement does not allow sending signals faster than light, as demonstrated by the no-communication theorem.
Another possibility opened by entanglement is testing for "hidden variables", hypothetical properties more fundamental than the quantities addressed in quantum theory itself, knowledge of which would allow more exact predictions than quantum theory provides.
A collection of results, most significantly Bell's theorem, have demonstrated that broad classes of such hidden-variable theories are in fact incompatible with quantum physics.
According to Bell's theorem, if nature actually operates in accord with any theory of local hidden variables, then the results of a Bell test will be constrained in a particular, quantifiable way.
Many Bell tests have been performed and they have shown results incompatible with the constraints imposed by local hidden variables.
It is not possible to present these concepts in more than a superficial way without introducing the mathematics involved; understanding quantum mechanics requires not only manipulating complex numbers, but also linear algebra, differential equations, group theory, and other more advanced subjects.
Accordingly, this article will present a mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics and survey its application to some useful and oft-studied examples.
In other words, the possible states are points in the projective space of a Hilbert space, usually called the complex projective space.
Physical quantities of interest – position, momentum, energy, spin – are represented by observables, which are Hermitian (more precisely, self-adjoint) linear operators acting on the Hilbert space.
A quantum state can be an eigenvector of an observable, in which case it is called an eigenstate, and the associated eigenvalue corresponds to the value of the observable in that eigenstate.
More generally, a quantum state will be a linear combination of the eigenstates, known as a quantum superposition.
In the continuous case, these formulas give instead the probability density.
The probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics thus stems from the act of measurement.
This is one of the most debated aspects of quantum theory, with different interpretations of quantum mechanics giving radically different answers to questions regarding quantum-state collapse, as discussed below.
Some wave functions produce probability distributions that are independent of time, such as eigenstates of the Hamiltonian.
Many systems that are treated dynamically in classical mechanics are described by such "static" wave functions.
For example, a single electron in an unexcited atom is pictured classically as a particle moving in a circular trajectory around the atomic nucleus, whereas in quantum mechanics, it is described by a static wave function surrounding the nucleus.
For example, the electron wave function for an unexcited hydrogen atom is a spherically symmetric function known as an s orbital (Fig.
Analytic solutions of the Schrödinger equation are known for very few relatively simple model Hamiltonians including the quantum harmonic oscillator, the particle in a box, the dihydrogen cation, and the hydrogen atom.
Even the helium atom – which contains just two electrons – has defied all attempts at a fully analytic treatment, admitting no solution in closed form.
However, there are techniques for finding approximate solutions.
One method, called perturbation theory, uses the analytic result for a simple quantum mechanical model to create a result for a related but more complicated model by (for example) the addition of a weak potential energy.
Another approximation method applies to systems for which quantum mechanics produces only small deviations from classical behavior.
These deviations can then be computed based on the classical motion.
One consequence of the basic quantum formalism is the uncertainty principle.
In its most familiar form, this states that no preparation of a quantum particle can imply simultaneously precise predictions both for a measurement of its position and for a measurement of its momentum.
Both position and momentum are observables, meaning that they are represented by Hermitian operators.
Either standard deviation can in principle be made arbitrarily small, but not both simultaneously.
Another consequence of the canonical commutation relation is that the position and momentum operators are Fourier transforms of each other, so that a description of an object according to its momentum is the Fourier transform of its description according to its position.
When two different quantum systems are considered together, the Hilbert space of the combined system is the tensor product of the Hilbert spaces of the two components.
States that are not separable are called entangled.
If the state for a composite system is entangled, it is impossible to describe either component system A or system B by a state vector.
One can instead define reduced density matrices that describe the statistics that can be obtained by making measurements on either component system alone.
This necessarily causes a loss of information, though: knowing the reduced density matrices of the individual systems is not enough to reconstruct the state of the composite system.
Just as density matrices specify the state of a subsystem of a larger system, analogously, positive operator-valued measures (POVMs) describe the effect on a subsystem of a measurement performed on a larger system.
POVMs are extensively used in quantum information theory.
As described above, entanglement is a key feature of models of measurement processes in which an apparatus becomes entangled with the system being measured.
Systems interacting with the environment in which they reside generally become entangled with that environment, a phenomenon known as quantum decoherence.
This can explain why, in practice, quantum effects are difficult to observe in systems larger than microscopic.
There are many mathematically equivalent formulations of quantum mechanics.
One of the oldest and most common is the "transformation theory" proposed by Paul Dirac, which unifies and generalizes the two earliest formulations of quantum mechanics – matrix mechanics (invented by Werner Heisenberg) and wave mechanics (invented by Erwin Schrödinger).
An alternative formulation of quantum mechanics is Feynman's path integral formulation, in which a quantum-mechanical amplitude is considered as a sum over all possible classical and non-classical paths between the initial and final states.
This is the quantum-mechanical counterpart of the action principle in classical mechanics.
This implies a quantum version of the result proven by Emmy Noether in classical (Lagrangian) mechanics: for every differentiable symmetry of a Hamiltonian, there exists a corresponding conservation law.
The simplest example of a quantum system with a position degree of freedom is a free particle in a single spatial dimension.
It is not possible for the solution to be a single momentum eigenstate, or a single position eigenstate, as these are not normalizable quantum states.
This illustrates the uncertainty principle.
As we let the Gaussian wave packet evolve in time, we see that its center moves through space at a constant velocity (like a classical particle with no forces acting on it).
However, the wave packet will also spread out as time progresses, which means that the position becomes more and more uncertain.
The uncertainty in momentum, however, stays constant.
The particle in a one-dimensional potential energy box is the most mathematically simple example where restraints lead to the quantization of energy levels.
The box is defined as having zero potential energy everywhere inside a certain region, and therefore infinite potential energy everywhere outside that region.
A finite potential well is the generalization of the infinite potential well problem to potential wells having finite depth.
The finite potential well problem is mathematically more complicated than the infinite particle-in-a-box problem as the wave function is not pinned to zero at the walls of the well.
Instead, the wave function must satisfy more complicated mathematical boundary conditions as it is nonzero in regions outside the well.
Another related problem is that of the rectangular potential barrier, which furnishes a model for the quantum tunneling effect that plays an important role in the performance of modern technologies such as flash memory and scanning tunneling microscopy.
This problem can either be treated by directly solving the Schrödinger equation, which is not trivial, or by using the more elegant "ladder method" first proposed by Paul Dirac.
This is another example illustrating the discretization of energy for bound states.
The Mach–Zehnder interferometer (MZI) illustrates the concepts of superposition and interference with linear algebra in dimension 2, rather than differential equations.
It can be seen as a simplified version of the double-slit experiment, but it is of interest in its own right, for example in the delayed choice quantum eraser, the Elitzur–Vaidman bomb tester, and in studies of quantum entanglement.
We can model a photon going through the interferometer by considering that at each point it can be in a superposition of only two paths: the "lower" path which starts from the left, goes straight through both beam splitters, and ends at the top, and the "upper" path which starts from the bottom, goes straight through both beam splitters, and ends at the right.
One can therefore use the Mach–Zehnder interferometer to estimate the phase shift by estimating these probabilities.
It is interesting to consider what would happen if the photon were definitely in either the "lower" or "upper" paths between the beam splitters.
This can be accomplished by blocking one of the paths, or equivalently by removing the first beam splitter (and feeding the photon from the left or the bottom, as desired).
From this we can conclude that the photon does not take one path or another after the first beam splitter, but rather that it is in a genuine quantum superposition of the two paths.
Quantum mechanics has had enormous success in explaining many of the features of our universe, with regard to small-scale and discrete quantities and interactions which cannot be explained by classical methods.
Quantum mechanics is often the only theory that can reveal the individual behaviors of the subatomic particles that make up all forms of matter (electrons, protons, neutrons, photons, and others).
Solid-state physics and materials science are dependent upon quantum mechanics.
In many aspects, modern technology operates at a scale where quantum effects are significant.
Important applications of quantum theory include quantum chemistry, quantum optics, quantum computing, superconducting magnets, light-emitting diodes, the optical amplifier and the laser, the transistor and semiconductors such as the microprocessor, medical and research imaging such as magnetic resonance imaging and electron microscopy.
Explanations for many biological and physical phenomena are rooted in the nature of the chemical bond, most notably the macro-molecule DNA.
The rules of quantum mechanics assert that the state space of a system is a Hilbert space and that observables of the system are Hermitian operators acting on vectors in that space – although they do not tell us which Hilbert space or which operators.
These can be chosen appropriately in order to obtain a quantitative description of a quantum system, a necessary step in making physical predictions.
An important guide for making these choices is the correspondence principle, a heuristic which states that the predictions of quantum mechanics reduce to those of classical mechanics in the regime of large quantum numbers.
One can also start from an established classical model of a particular system, and then try to guess the underlying quantum model that would give rise to the classical model in the correspondence limit.
This approach is known as quantization.
When quantum mechanics was originally formulated, it was applied to models whose correspondence limit was non-relativistic classical mechanics.
For instance, the well-known model of the quantum harmonic oscillator uses an explicitly non-relativistic expression for the kinetic energy of the oscillator, and is thus a quantum version of the classical harmonic oscillator.
Complications arise with chaotic systems, which do not have good quantum numbers, and quantum chaos studies the relationship between classical and quantum descriptions in these systems.
Quantum decoherence is a mechanism through which quantum systems lose coherence, and thus become incapable of displaying many typically quantum effects: quantum superpositions become simply probabilistic mixtures, and quantum entanglement becomes simply classical correlations.
Quantum coherence is not typically evident at macroscopic scales, though at temperatures approaching absolute zero quantum behavior may manifest macroscopically.
Many macroscopic properties of a classical system are a direct consequence of the quantum behavior of its parts.
For example, the stability of bulk matter (consisting of atoms and molecules which would quickly collapse under electric forces alone), the rigidity of solids, and the mechanical, thermal, chemical, optical and magnetic properties of matter are all results of the interaction of electric charges under the rules of quantum mechanics.
Early attempts to merge quantum mechanics with special relativity involved the replacement of the Schrödinger equation with a covariant equation such as the Klein–Gordon equation or the Dirac equation.
While these theories were successful in explaining many experimental results, they had certain unsatisfactory qualities stemming from their neglect of the relativistic creation and annihilation of particles.
A fully relativistic quantum theory required the development of quantum field theory, which applies quantization to a field (rather than a fixed set of particles).
The first complete quantum field theory, quantum electrodynamics, provides a fully quantum description of the electromagnetic interaction.
Quantum electrodynamics is, along with general relativity, one of the most accurate physical theories ever devised.
The full apparatus of quantum field theory is often unnecessary for describing electrodynamic systems.
A simpler approach, one that has been used since the inception of quantum mechanics, is to treat charged particles as quantum mechanical objects being acted on by a classical electromagnetic field.
Likewise, in a Stern–Gerlach experiment, a charged particle is modeled as a quantum system, while the background magnetic field is described classically.
This "semi-classical" approach fails if quantum fluctuations in the electromagnetic field play an important role, such as in the emission of photons by charged particles.
Quantum field theories for the strong nuclear force and the weak nuclear force have also been developed.
The quantum field theory of the strong nuclear force is called quantum chromodynamics, and describes the interactions of subnuclear particles such as quarks and gluons.
The weak nuclear force and the electromagnetic force were unified, in their quantized forms, into a single quantum field theory (known as electroweak theory), by the physicists Abdus Salam, Sheldon Glashow and Steven Weinberg.
Even though the predictions of both quantum theory and general relativity have been supported by rigorous and repeated empirical evidence, their abstract formalisms contradict each other and they have proven extremely difficult to incorporate into one consistent, cohesive model.
Gravity is negligible in many areas of particle physics, so that unification between general relativity and quantum mechanics is not an urgent issue in those particular applications.
However, the lack of a correct theory of quantum gravity is an important issue in physical cosmology and the search by physicists for an elegant "Theory of Everything" (TOE).
Consequently, resolving the inconsistencies between both theories has been a major goal of 20th- and 21st-century physics.
This TOE would combine not only the models of subatomic physics but also derive the four fundamental forces of nature from a single force or phenomenon.
One proposal for doing so is string theory, which posits that the point-like particles of particle physics are replaced by one-dimensional objects called strings.
String theory describes how these strings propagate through space and interact with each other.
On distance scales larger than the string scale, a string looks just like an ordinary particle, with its mass, charge, and other properties determined by the vibrational state of the string.
In string theory, one of the many vibrational states of the string corresponds to the graviton, a quantum mechanical particle that carries gravitational force.
Another popular theory is loop quantum gravity (LQG), which describes quantum properties of gravity and is thus a theory of quantum spacetime.
LQG is an attempt to merge and adapt standard quantum mechanics and standard general relativity.
This theory describes space as an extremely fine fabric "woven" of finite loops called spin networks.
The evolution of a spin network over time is called a spin foam.
The characteristic length scale of a spin foam is the Planck length, approximately 1.
Since its inception, the many counter-intuitive aspects and results of quantum mechanics have provoked strong philosophical debates and many interpretations.
The arguments centre on the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics, the difficulties with wavefunction collapse and the related measurement problem, and quantum nonlocality.
Perhaps the only consensus that exists about these issues is that there is no consensus.
Richard Feynman once said, "I think I can safely say that nobody understands quantum mechanics.
The views of Niels Bohr, Werner Heisenberg and other physicists are often grouped together as the "Copenhagen interpretation".
According to these views, the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics is not a temporary feature which will eventually be replaced by a deterministic theory, but is instead a final renunciation of the classical idea of "causality".
Bohr in particular emphasized that any well-defined application of the quantum mechanical formalism must always make reference to the experimental arrangement, due to the complementary nature of evidence obtained under different experimental situations.
Copenhagen-type interpretations were adopted by Nobel laureates in quantum physics, including Bohr, Heisenberg, Schrödinger, Feynman, and Zeilinger as well as 21st-century researchers in quantum foundations.
Albert Einstein, himself one of the founders of quantum theory, was troubled by its apparent failure to respect some cherished metaphysical principles, such as determinism and locality.
Einstein's long-running exchanges with Bohr about the meaning and status of quantum mechanics are now known as the Bohr–Einstein debates.
Einstein believed that underlying quantum mechanics must be a theory that explicitly forbids action at a distance.
He argued that quantum mechanics was incomplete, a theory that was valid but not fundamental, analogous to how thermodynamics is valid, but the fundamental theory behind it is statistical mechanics.
In 1935, Einstein and his collaborators Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen published an argument that the principle of locality implies the incompleteness of quantum mechanics, a thought experiment later termed the Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen paradox.
In 1964, John Bell showed that EPR's principle of locality, together with determinism, was actually incompatible with quantum mechanics: they implied constraints on the correlations produced by distance systems, now known as Bell inequalities, that can be violated by entangled particles.
Since then several experiments have been performed to obtain these correlations, with the result that they do in fact violate Bell inequalities, and thus falsify the conjunction of locality with determinism.
Bohmian mechanics shows that it is possible to reformulate quantum mechanics to make it deterministic, at the price of making it explicitly nonlocal.
It attributes not only a wave function to a physical system but also a real position, which evolves deterministically under a nonlocal guiding equation.
The evolution of a physical system is given at all times by the Schrödinger equation together with the guiding equation; there is never a collapse of the wave function.
This solves the measurement problem.
Everett's many-worlds interpretation, formulated in 1956, holds that all the possibilities described by quantum theory simultaneously occur in a multiverse composed of mostly independent parallel universes.
This is a consequence of removing the axiom of the collapse of the wave packet.
All possible states of the measured system and the measuring apparatus, together with the observer, are present in a real physical quantum superposition.
While the multiverse is deterministic, we perceive non-deterministic behavior governed by probabilities because we do not observe the multiverse as a whole but only one parallel universe at a time.
Exactly how this is supposed to work has been the subject of much debate.
Several attempts have been made to make sense of this and derive the Born rule, with no consensus on whether they have been successful.
Relational quantum mechanics appeared in the late 1990s as a modern derivative of Copenhagen-type ideas, and QBism was developed some years later.
Quantum mechanics was developed in the early decades of the 20th century, driven by the need to explain phenomena that, in some cases, had been observed in earlier times.
Scientific inquiry into the wave nature of light began in the 17th and 18th centuries, when scientists such as Robert Hooke, Christiaan Huygens and Leonhard Euler proposed a wave theory of light based on experimental observations.
In 1803 English polymath Thomas Young described the famous double-slit experiment.
This experiment played a major role in the general acceptance of the wave theory of light.
During the early 19th century, chemical research by John Dalton and Amedeo Avogadro lent weight to the atomic theory of matter, an idea that James Clerk Maxwell, Ludwig Boltzmann and others built upon to establish the kinetic theory of gases.
The successes of kinetic theory gave further credence to the idea that matter is composed of atoms, yet the theory also had shortcomings that would only be resolved by the development of quantum mechanics.
While the early conception of atoms from Greek philosophy had been that they were indivisible units – the word "atom" deriving from the Greek for 'uncuttable' – the 19th century saw the formulation of hypotheses about subatomic structure.
One important discovery in that regard was Michael Faraday's 1838 observation of a glow caused by an electrical discharge inside a glass tube containing gas at low pressure.
Julius Plücker, Johann Wilhelm Hittorf and Eugen Goldstein carried on and improved upon Faraday's work, leading to the identification of cathode rays, which J.
Thomson found to consist of subatomic particles that would be called electrons.
The black-body radiation problem was discovered by Gustav Kirchhoff in 1859.
In 1900, Max Planck proposed the hypothesis that energy is radiated and absorbed in discrete "quanta" (or energy packets), yielding a calculation that precisely matched the observed patterns of black-body radiation.
The word quantum derives from the Latin, meaning "how great" or "how much".
Planck cautiously insisted that this was only an aspect of the processes of absorption and emission of radiation and was not the physical reality of the radiation.
In fact, he considered his quantum hypothesis a mathematical trick to get the right answer rather than a sizable discovery.
However, in 1905 Albert Einstein interpreted Planck's quantum hypothesis realistically and used it to explain the photoelectric effect, in which shining light on certain materials can eject electrons from the material.
Niels Bohr then developed Planck's ideas about radiation into a model of the hydrogen atom that successfully predicted the spectral lines of hydrogen.
Einstein further developed this idea to show that an electromagnetic wave such as light could also be described as a particle (later called the photon), with a discrete amount of energy that depends on its frequency.
In his paper "On the Quantum Theory of Radiation", Einstein expanded on the interaction between energy and matter to explain the absorption and emission of energy by atoms.
Although overshadowed at the time by his general theory of relativity, this paper articulated the mechanism underlying the stimulated emission of radiation, which became the basis of the laser.
This phase is known as the old quantum theory.
Never complete or self-consistent, the old quantum theory was rather a set of heuristic corrections to classical mechanics.
The theory is now understood as a semi-classical approximation to modern quantum mechanics.
Notable results from this period include, in addition to the work of Planck, Einstein and Bohr mentioned above, Einstein and Peter Debye's work on the specific heat of solids, Bohr and Hendrika Johanna van Leeuwen's proof that classical physics cannot account for diamagnetism, and Arnold Sommerfeld's extension of the Bohr model to include special-relativistic effects.
In the mid-1920s quantum mechanics was developed to become the standard formulation for atomic physics.
In 1923, the French physicist Louis de Broglie put forward his theory of matter waves by stating that particles can exhibit wave characteristics and vice versa.
Building on de Broglie's approach, modern quantum mechanics was born in 1925, when the German physicists Werner Heisenberg, Max Born, and Pascual Jordan developed matrix mechanics and the Austrian physicist Erwin Schrödinger invented wave mechanics.
Born introduced the probabilistic interpretation of Schrödinger's wave function in July 1926.
Thus, the entire field of quantum physics emerged, leading to its wider acceptance at the Fifth Solvay Conference in 1927.
By 1930, quantum mechanics had been further unified and formalized by David Hilbert, Paul Dirac and John von Neumann with greater emphasis on measurement, the statistical nature of our knowledge of reality, and philosophical speculation about the 'observer'.
It has since permeated many disciplines, including quantum chemistry, quantum electronics, quantum optics, and quantum information science.
It also provides a useful framework for many features of the modern periodic table of elements, and describes the behaviors of atoms during chemical bonding and the flow of electrons in computer semiconductors, and therefore plays a crucial role in many modern technologies.
While quantum mechanics was constructed to describe the world of the very small, it is also needed to explain some macroscopic phenomena such as superconductors and superfluids.
Quantum Physics Made Relatively Simple: three video lectures by Hans Bethe.
Quantum Cook Book and PHYS 201: Fundamentals of Physics II by Ramamurti Shankar, Yale OpenCourseware.
Modern Physics: With waves, thermodynamics, and optics – an online textbook.
MIT OpenCourseWare: Chemistry and Physics.
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Mathematics is a field of study that discovers and organizes methods, theories, and theorems that are developed and proved either in response to the needs of empirical sciences or the needs of mathematics itself.
There are many areas of mathematics, including number theory (the study of integers and their properties), algebra (the study of operations and the structures they form), geometry (the study of shapes and spaces that contain them), analysis (the study of approximating continuous changes), and set theory (presently used as a foundation for all mathematics).
Mathematics involves the description and manipulation of abstract objects that are either abstractions from nature or purely abstract entities that are stipulated to have certain properties, called axioms.
Mathematics uses pure reason to prove the properties of objects through proofs, which consist of a succession of applications of deductive rules to already established results.
These results, called theorems, include previously proved theorems, axioms, and—in case of abstraction from nature—some basic properties that are considered true starting points of the theory under consideration.
Mathematics is essential in the natural sciences, engineering, medicine, finance, computer science, and the social sciences.
Although mathematics is extensively used for modeling phenomena, the fundamental truths of mathematics are independent of any scientific experimentation.
Some areas of mathematics, such as game theory, are developed in close correlation with their applications and are often grouped under applied mathematics.
Other areas are developed independently from any application but often find practical applications later.
Mathematical written records first appeared in Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, but the concept of proof and its associated mathematical rigor began in Ancient Greek mathematics, exemplified in Euclid's Elements.
Mathematics was primarily divided into geometry and arithmetic until the 16th and 17th centuries, when algebra and infinitesimal calculus evolved into new fields.
Since then, the interaction between mathematical innovations and scientific discoveries has led to a correlated increase in the development of both.
At the end of the 19th century, the foundational crisis of mathematics led to the systematic use of the axiomatic method, which heralded a dramatic increase in the number of mathematical areas and their fields of application.
The contemporary Mathematics Subject Classification lists more than sixty first-level areas of mathematics.
Before the Renaissance, mathematics was divided into two main areas: arithmetic, regarding the study and manipulation of numbers, and geometry, regarding the study of shapes.
Some types of pseudoscience, such as numerology and astrology, were not then clearly distinguished from mathematics.
Beginning with the Renaissance, two more areas became predominant.
New mathematical notation led to modern algebra which, roughly speaking, begins with the study and manipulation of algebraic expressions.
Calculus, consisting of the two subfields differential calculus and integral calculus, originated with geometry but evolved into the study of continuous functions, which model the typically nonlinear relationships between varying quantities, as represented by variables.
This division into four main areas—arithmetic, geometry, algebra, and calculus—endured until the end of the 19th century.
Other areas that were previously studied by mathematicians, such as celestial mechanics and solid mechanics, are now considered as belonging to physics.
The subject of combinatorics has been studied for much of recorded history, yet did not become a separate branch of mathematics until the 17th century.
At the end of the 19th century, the foundational crisis in mathematics and the systematic use of the axiomatic method led to an explosion of new areas of mathematics.
The 2020 Mathematics Subject Classification contains no less than sixty-three first-level areas.
Some of these areas correspond to the older division, as is true regarding number theory (the modern name for higher arithmetic) and geometry.
Several other first-level areas have "geometry" in their names or are otherwise commonly considered part of geometry.
Algebra and calculus do not appear as first-level areas but are split into several first-level areas.
Other first-level areas emerged during the 20th century or had not previously been considered as mathematics, such as mathematical logic and foundations.
Number theory was once called arithmetic, but nowadays this term is mostly used for numerical calculations.
The study of numbers arguably dates back to ancient Babylon and probably China, but developed into a distinct discipline in Ancient Greece.
Two prominent early number theorists were Euclid and Diophantus of Alexandria.
The modern study of number theory in its abstract form is largely attributed to Pierre de Fermat and Leonhard Euler.
The field came to full fruition with the contributions of Adrien-Marie Legendre and Carl Friedrich Gauss.
Many easily stated number problems have solutions that require sophisticated methods, often from across mathematics.
A prominent example is Fermat's Last Theorem.
This conjecture was stated in 1637 by Pierre de Fermat, but it was proved only in 1994 by Andrew Wiles, who used tools including scheme theory from algebraic geometry, category theory, and homological algebra.
Another example is Goldbach's conjecture, which asserts that every even integer greater than 2 is the sum of two prime numbers.
Stated in 1742 by Christian Goldbach, it remains unproven despite considerable effort.
Number theory includes several subareas, including analytic number theory, algebraic number theory, geometry of numbers (method oriented), Diophantine analysis, and transcendence theory (problem oriented).
Geometry is one of the oldest branches of mathematics.
It started with empirical recipes concerning shapes, such as lines, angles and circles, which were developed mainly for the needs of surveying and architecture, but has since blossomed out into many other subfields.
A fundamental innovation was the ancient Greeks' introduction of the concept of proofs, which require that every assertion must be proved.
For example, it is not sufficient to verify by measurement that, say, two lengths are equal; their equality must be proven via reasoning from previously accepted results (theorems) and a few basic statements.
The basic statements are not subject to proof because they are self-evident (postulates), or are part of the definition of the subject of study (axioms).
This principle, foundational for all mathematics, was first elaborated for geometry, and was systematized by Euclid around 300 BC in his book Elements.
The resulting Euclidean geometry is the study of shapes and their arrangements constructed from lines, planes and circles in the Euclidean plane (plane geometry) and the three-dimensional Euclidean space.
Euclidean geometry was developed without change of methods or scope until the 17th century, when René Descartes introduced what is now called Cartesian coordinates.
This constituted a major change of paradigm: Instead of defining real numbers as lengths of line segments (see number line), it allowed the representation of points using their coordinates, which are numbers.
Algebra (and later, calculus) can thus be used to solve geometrical problems.
Geometry was split into two new subfields: synthetic geometry, which uses purely geometrical methods, and analytic geometry, which uses coordinates systemically.
Analytic geometry allows the study of curves unrelated to circles and lines.
Such curves can be defined as the graph of functions, the study of which led to differential geometry.
They can also be defined as implicit equations, often polynomial equations (which spawned algebraic geometry).
Analytic geometry also makes it possible to consider Euclidean spaces of higher than three dimensions.
In the 19th century, mathematicians discovered non-Euclidean geometries, which do not follow the parallel postulate.
By questioning that postulate's truth, this discovery has been viewed as joining Russell's paradox in revealing the foundational crisis of mathematics.
This aspect of the crisis was solved by systematizing the axiomatic method, and adopting that the truth of the chosen axioms is not a mathematical problem.
In turn, the axiomatic method allows for the study of various geometries obtained either by changing the axioms or by considering properties that do not change under specific transformations of the space.
Projective geometry, introduced in the 16th century by Girard Desargues, extends Euclidean geometry by adding points at infinity at which parallel lines intersect.
This simplifies many aspects of classical geometry by unifying the treatments for intersecting and parallel lines.
Affine geometry, the study of properties relative to parallelism and independent from the concept of length.
Differential geometry, the study of curves, surfaces, and their generalizations, which are defined using differentiable functions.
Manifold theory, the study of shapes that are not necessarily embedded in a larger space.
Riemannian geometry, the study of distance properties in curved spaces.
Algebraic geometry, the study of curves, surfaces, and their generalizations, which are defined using polynomials.
Topology, the study of properties that are kept under continuous deformations.
Algebraic topology, the use in topology of algebraic methods, mainly homological algebra.
Discrete geometry, the study of finite configurations in geometry.
Convex geometry, the study of convex sets, which takes its importance from its applications in optimization.
Complex geometry, the geometry obtained by replacing real numbers with complex numbers.
Algebra is the art of manipulating equations and formulas.
Diophantus (3rd century) and al-Khwarizmi (9th century) were the two main precursors of algebra.
Diophantus solved some equations involving unknown natural numbers by deducing new relations until he obtained the solution.
Al-Khwarizmi introduced systematic methods for transforming equations, such as moving a term from one side of an equation into the other side.
The term algebra is derived from the Arabic word al-jabr meaning 'the reunion of broken parts' that he used for naming one of these methods in the title of his main treatise.
Algebra became an area in its own right only with François Viète (1540–1603), who introduced the use of variables for representing unknown or unspecified numbers.
Variables allow mathematicians to describe the operations that have to be done on the numbers represented using mathematical formulas.
Until the 19th century, algebra consisted mainly of the study of linear equations (presently linear algebra), and polynomial equations in a single unknown, which were called algebraic equations (a term still in use, although it may be ambiguous).
During the 19th century, mathematicians began to use variables to represent things other than numbers (such as matrices, modular integers, and geometric transformations), on which generalizations of arithmetic operations are often valid.
The concept of algebraic structure addresses this, consisting of a set whose elements are unspecified, of operations acting on the elements of the set, and rules that these operations must follow.
The scope of algebra thus grew to include the study of algebraic structures.
Some types of algebraic structures have useful and often fundamental properties, in many areas of mathematics.
The study of types of algebraic structures as mathematical objects is the purpose of universal algebra and category theory.
The latter applies to every mathematical structure (not only algebraic ones).
At its origin, it was introduced, together with homological algebra for allowing the algebraic study of non-algebraic objects such as topological spaces; this particular area of application is called algebraic topology.
Calculus, formerly called infinitesimal calculus, was introduced independently and simultaneously by 17th-century mathematicians Newton and Leibniz.
It is fundamentally the study of the relationship between variables that depend continuously on each other.
Calculus was expanded in the 18th century by Euler with the introduction of the concept of a function and many other results.
Presently, "calculus" refers mainly to the elementary part of this theory, and "analysis" is commonly used for advanced parts.
Analysis is further subdivided into real analysis, where variables represent real numbers, and complex analysis, where variables represent complex numbers.
Discrete mathematics, broadly speaking, is the study of individual, countable mathematical objects.
An example is the set of all integers.
Because the objects of study here are discrete, the methods of calculus and mathematical analysis do not directly apply.
Algorithms—especially their implementation and computational complexity—play a major role in discrete mathematics.
The four color theorem and optimal sphere packing were two major problems of discrete mathematics solved in the second half of the 20th century.
The P versus NP problem, which remains open to this day, is also important for discrete mathematics, since its solution would potentially impact a large number of computationally difficult problems.
Combinatorics, the art of enumerating mathematical objects that satisfy some given constraints.
Originally, these objects were elements or subsets of a given set; this has been extended to various objects, which establishes a strong link between combinatorics and other parts of discrete mathematics.
For example, discrete geometry includes counting configurations of geometric shapes.
The two subjects of mathematical logic and set theory have belonged to mathematics since the end of the 19th century.
Before this period, sets were not considered to be mathematical objects, and logic, although used for mathematical proofs, belonged to philosophy and was not specifically studied by mathematicians.
Before Cantor's study of infinite sets, mathematicians were reluctant to consider actually infinite collections, and considered infinity to be the result of endless enumeration.
Cantor's work offended many mathematicians not only by considering actually infinite sets but by showing that this implies different sizes of infinity, per Cantor's diagonal argument.
This led to the controversy over Cantor's set theory.
In the same period, various areas of mathematics concluded the former intuitive definitions of the basic mathematical objects were insufficient for ensuring mathematical rigor.
This became the foundational crisis of mathematics.
It was eventually solved in mainstream mathematics by systematizing the axiomatic method inside a formalized set theory.
Roughly speaking, each mathematical object is defined by the set of all similar objects and the properties that these objects must have.
For example, in Peano arithmetic, the natural numbers are defined by "zero is a number", "each number has a unique successor", "each number but zero has a unique predecessor", and some rules of reasoning.
This mathematical abstraction from reality is embodied in the modern philosophy of formalism, as founded by David Hilbert around 1910.
The "nature" of the objects defined this way is a philosophical problem that mathematicians leave to philosophers, even if many mathematicians have opinions on this nature, and use their opinion—sometimes called "intuition"—to guide their study and proofs.
The approach allows considering "logics" (that is, sets of allowed deducing rules), theorems, proofs, etc.
For example, Gödel's incompleteness theorems assert, roughly speaking that, in every consistent formal system that contains the natural numbers, there are theorems that are true (that is provable in a stronger system), but not provable inside the system.
This approach to the foundations of mathematics was challenged during the first half of the 20th century by mathematicians led by Brouwer, who promoted intuitionistic logic (which explicitly lacks the law of excluded middle).
These problems and debates led to a wide expansion of mathematical logic, with subareas such as model theory (modeling some logical theories inside other theories), proof theory, type theory, computability theory and computational complexity theory.
Although these aspects of mathematical logic were introduced before the rise of computers, their use in compiler design, formal verification, program analysis, proof assistants and other aspects of computer science, contributed in turn to the expansion of these logical theories.
Computational mathematics is the study of mathematical problems that are typically too large for human, numerical capacity.
Part of computational mathematics involves numerical analysis, which is the study of methods for problems in analysis using functional analysis and approximation theory.
Numerical analysis broadly includes the study of approximation and discretization, with special focus on rounding errors.
Numerical analysis and, more broadly, scientific computing, also study non-analytic topics of mathematical science, especially algorithmic-matrix-and-graph theory.
Other areas of computational mathematics include computer algebra and symbolic computation.
The word mathematics comes from the Ancient Greek word máthēma (μάθημα), meaning 'something learned, knowledge, mathematics', and the derived expression mathēmatikḗ tékhnē (μαθηματικὴ τέχνη), meaning 'mathematical science'.
It entered the English language during the Late Middle English period through French and Latin.
Traditionally, one of the two main schools of thought in Pythagoreanism was known as the mathēmatikoi (μαθηματικοί)—which at the time meant "learners" rather than "mathematicians" in the modern sense.
The Pythagoreans were likely the first to constrain the use of the word to just the study of arithmetic and geometry.
By the time of Aristotle (384–322 BC) this meaning was fully established.
In Latin and English, until around 1700, the term mathematics more commonly meant "astrology" (or sometimes "astronomy") rather than "mathematics"; the meaning gradually changed to its present one from about 1500 to 1800.
This change has resulted in several mistranslations: For example, Saint Augustine's warning that Christians should beware of mathematici, meaning "astrologers", is sometimes mistranslated as a condemnation of mathematicians.
The apparent plural form in English goes back to the Latin neuter plural mathematica (Cicero), based on the Greek plural ta mathēmatiká (τὰ μαθηματικά) and means roughly "all things mathematical", although it is plausible that English borrowed only the adjective mathematic(al) and formed the noun mathematics anew, after the pattern of physics and metaphysics, inherited from Greek.
In English, the noun mathematics takes a singular verb.
It is often shortened to maths or, in North America, math.
In addition to recognizing how to count physical objects, prehistoric peoples may have also known how to count abstract quantities, like time—days, seasons, or years.
Archaeological evidence has suggested that the Ancient Egyptian counting system had origins in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Also, fractal geometry designs which are widespread among Sub-Saharan African cultures are also found in Egyptian architecture and cosmological signs.
The Ishango bone, according to scholar Alexander Marshack, may have influenced the later development of mathematics in Egypt as, like some entries on the Ishango bone, Egyptian arithmetic also made use of multiplication by 2; this however, is disputed.
Megalithic structures located in Nabta Playa, Upper Egypt featured astronomy, calendar arrangements in alignment with the heliacal rising of Sirius and supported calibration of the yearly calendar for the annual Nile flood.
Ancient Nubians established a system of geometric rules which served as the basis for initial sunclocks.
Nubians also exercised a trigonometric methodology comparable to their Egyptian counterparts.
Evidence for more complex mathematics does not appear until around 3000 BC, when the Babylonians and Egyptians began using arithmetic, algebra, and geometry for taxation and other financial calculations, for building and construction, and for astronomy.
The oldest mathematical texts from Mesopotamia and Egypt are from 2000 to 1800 BC.
Many early texts mention Pythagorean triples and so, by inference, the Pythagorean theorem seems to be the most ancient and widespread mathematical concept after basic arithmetic and geometry.
It is in Babylonian mathematics that elementary arithmetic (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division) first appear in the archaeological record.
The Babylonians also possessed a place-value system and used a sexagesimal numeral system which is still in use today for measuring angles and time.
By the 5th century BC, Greek mathematics began to emerge as a distinct discipline and some Ancient Greeks such as the Pythagoreans appeared to have considered it a subject in its own right.
Around 300 BC, Euclid organized mathematical knowledge by way of postulates and first principles, which evolved into the axiomatic method that is used in mathematics today, consisting of definition, axiom, theorem, and proof.
His book, Elements, covers geometry and number theory and is widely considered the most successful and influential textbook of all time.
Another notable mathematician of antiquity is Archimedes of Syracuse (c.
He developed methods for calculating the surface area and volume of solids of revolution, including using the method of exhaustion to calculate the area under the arc of a parabola with the summation of an infinite series, in a manner reminiscent of modern calculus.
Other notable achievements of Greek mathematics are conic sections (Apollonius of Perga, 3rd century BC), trigonometry (Hipparchus of Nicaea, 2nd century BC), and the beginnings of pre-modern algebra (Diophantus, 3rd century AD).
The Hindu–Arabic numeral system and the rules for the use of its operations, in use throughout the world today, evolved over the course of the first millennium AD in India and were transmitted to the Western world via Islamic mathematics.
Other notable developments of Indian mathematics include the modern definition and approximation of sine and cosine, and an early form of infinite series.
During the Golden Age of Islam, especially during the 9th and 10th centuries, mathematics saw many important innovations building on Greek mathematics.
The most notable achievement of Islamic mathematics was the development of algebra.
Other achievements of the Islamic period include advances in spherical trigonometry and the addition of the decimal point to the Arabic numeral system.
Many notable mathematicians from this period were Persian, such as Al-Khwarizmi, Omar Khayyam and Sharaf al-Dīn al-Ṭūsī.
The Greek and Arabic mathematical texts were in turn translated to Latin during the Middle Ages and made available in Europe.
During the early modern period, mathematics began to develop at an accelerating pace in Western Europe, with innovations that revolutionized mathematics, such as the introduction of variables and symbolic notation by François Viète (1540–1603), the introduction of logarithms by John Napier in 1614, which greatly simplified numerical calculations, especially for astronomy and marine navigation, the introduction of coordinates by René Descartes (1596–1650) for reducing geometry to algebra, and the development of calculus by Isaac Newton (1643–1727) and Gottfried Leibniz (1646–1716).
Leonhard Euler (1707–1783), the most notable mathematician of the 18th century, unified these innovations into a single corpus with a standardized terminology, and completed them with the discovery and the proof of numerous theorems.
Perhaps the foremost mathematician of the 19th century was the German mathematician Carl Gauss, who made numerous contributions to fields such as algebra, analysis, differential geometry, matrix theory, number theory, and statistics.
In the early 20th century, Kurt Gödel transformed mathematics by publishing his incompleteness theorems, which show in part that any consistent axiomatic system—if powerful enough to describe arithmetic—will contain true propositions that cannot be proved.
Mathematics has since been greatly extended, and there has been a fruitful interaction between mathematics and science, to the benefit of both.
Mathematical discoveries continue to be made to this very day.
According to Mikhail B.
Sevryuk, in the January 2006 issue of the Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, "The number of papers and books included in the Mathematical Reviews (MR) database since 1940 (the first year of operation of MR) is now more than 1.
The overwhelming majority of works in this ocean contain new mathematical theorems and their proofs.
Mathematical notation is widely used in science and engineering for representing complex concepts and properties in a concise, unambiguous, and accurate way.
This notation consists of symbols used for representing operations, unspecified numbers, relations and any other mathematical objects, and then assembling them into expressions and formulas.
More precisely, numbers and other mathematical objects are represented by symbols called variables, which are generally Latin or Greek letters, and often include subscripts.
All these symbols are generally grouped according to specific rules to form expressions and formulas.
Normally, expressions and formulas do not appear alone, but are included in sentences of the current language, where expressions play the role of noun phrases and formulas play the role of clauses.
Mathematics has developed a rich terminology covering a broad range of fields that study the properties of various abstract, idealized objects and how they interact.
It is based on rigorous definitions that provide a standard foundation for communication.
An axiom or postulate is a mathematical statement that is taken to be true without need of proof.
If a mathematical statement has yet to be proven (or disproven), it is termed a conjecture.
Through a series of rigorous arguments employing deductive reasoning, a statement that is proven to be true becomes a theorem.
A specialized theorem that is mainly used to prove another theorem is called a lemma.
A proven instance that forms part of a more general finding is termed a corollary.
Numerous technical terms used in mathematics are neologisms, such as polynomial and homeomorphism.
Other technical terms are words of the common language that are used in an accurate meaning that may differ slightly from their common meaning.
For example, in mathematics, "or" means "one, the other or both", while, in common language, it is either ambiguous or means "one or the other but not both" (in mathematics, the latter is called "exclusive or").
Finally, many mathematical terms are common words that are used with a completely different meaning.
This may lead to sentences that are correct and true mathematical assertions, but appear to be nonsense to people who do not have the required background.
For example, "every free module is flat" and "a field is always a ring".
Mathematics is used in most sciences for modeling phenomena, which then allows predictions to be made from experimental laws.
The independence of mathematical truth from any experimentation implies that the accuracy of such predictions depends only on the adequacy of the model.
Inaccurate predictions, rather than being caused by invalid mathematical concepts, imply the need to change the mathematical model used.
For example, the perihelion precession of Mercury could only be explained after the emergence of Einstein's general relativity, which replaced Newton's law of gravitation as a better mathematical model.
There is still a philosophical debate whether mathematics is a science.
However, in practice, mathematicians are typically grouped with scientists, and mathematics shares much in common with the physical sciences.
Like them, it is falsifiable, which means in mathematics that, if a result or a theory is wrong, this can be proved by providing a counterexample.
Similarly as in science, theories and results (theorems) are often obtained from experimentation.
In mathematics, the experimentation may consist of computation on selected examples or of the study of figures or other representations of mathematical objects (often mind representations without physical support).
For example, when asked how he came about his theorems, Gauss once replied "durch planmässiges Tattonieren" (through systematic experimentation).
However, some authors emphasize that mathematics differs from the modern notion of science by not relying on empirical evidence.
Until the 19th century, there was no clear distinction between pure and applied mathematics as understood today.
The distinction between developing mathematics for its own sake or for its applications was rather fluid: natural numbers and arithmetic were introduced for the need of counting, and geometry was motivated by surveying, architecture, and astronomy, but both subjects quickly stood on their own.
Later, Isaac Newton used infinitesimal calculus in part to help explain the movement of the planets and his law of gravitation.
Moreover, since antiquity, most mathematicians were also scientists, and many scientists were also mathematicians.
Nonetheless, the Western tradition of pure mathematics traces its roots back to Ancient Greece.
The problem of integer factorization, for example, which goes back to Euclid in 300 BC, had no practical application before its use in the RSA cryptosystem, now widely used for the security of computer networks.
In the 19th century, mathematicians such as Karl Weierstrass and Richard Dedekind increasingly focused their research on internal problems, that is, pure mathematics.
This led to split mathematics into pure mathematics and applied mathematics, the latter being often considered as having a lower value among mathematical purists.
However, the lines between the two are frequently blurred.
The aftermath of World War II led to a surge in the development of applied mathematics in the US and elsewhere.
Many of the theories developed for applications were found interesting from the point of view of pure mathematics, and many results of pure mathematics were shown to have applications outside mathematics; in turn, the study of these applications may give new insights on the "pure theory".
An example of the first case is the theory of distributions, introduced by Laurent Schwartz for validating computations done in quantum mechanics, which became immediately an important tool of (pure) mathematical analysis.
An example of the second case is the decidability of the first-order theory of the real numbers, a problem of pure mathematics that was proved true by Alfred Tarski, with an algorithm that is impossible to implement because of a computational complexity that is much too high.
For getting an algorithm that can be implemented and can solve systems of polynomial equations and inequalities, George Collins introduced the cylindrical algebraic decomposition that became a fundamental tool in real algebraic geometry.
In the present day, the distinction between pure and applied mathematics is more a question of personal research aim of mathematicians than a division of mathematics into broad areas.
The Mathematics Subject Classification has a section for "general applied mathematics" but does not mention "pure mathematics".
However, these terms are still used in names of some university departments, such as at the Faculty of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge.
The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics is a phenomenon that was named and first made explicit by physicist Eugene Wigner.
It is the fact that many mathematical theories (even the "purest") have applications outside their initial object.
These applications may be completely outside their initial area of mathematics, and may concern physical phenomena that were completely unknown when the mathematical theory was introduced.
Examples of unexpected applications of mathematical theories can be found in many areas of mathematics.
A notable example is the prime factorization of natural numbers that was discovered more than 2,000 years before its common use for secure internet communications through the RSA cryptosystem.
A second historical example is the theory of ellipses.
They were studied by the ancient Greek mathematicians as conic sections (that is, intersections of cones with planes).
It was almost 2,000 years later that Johannes Kepler discovered that the trajectories of the planets are ellipses.
In the 19th century, the internal development of geometry (pure mathematics) led to definition and study of non-Euclidean geometries, spaces of dimension higher than three and manifolds.
At this time, these concepts seemed totally disconnected from the physical reality, but at the beginning of the 20th century, Albert Einstein developed the theory of relativity that uses fundamentally these concepts.
In particular, spacetime of special relativity is a non-Euclidean space of dimension four, and spacetime of general relativity is a (curved) manifold of dimension four.
A striking aspect of the interaction between mathematics and physics is when mathematics drives research in physics.
In both cases, the equations of the theories had unexplained solutions, which led to conjecture of the existence of an unknown particle, and the search for these particles.
In both cases, these particles were discovered a few years later by specific experiments.
Mathematics and physics have influenced each other over their modern history.
Modern physics uses mathematics abundantly, and is also considered to be the motivation of major mathematical developments.
Computing is closely related to mathematics in several ways.
Theoretical computer science is considered to be mathematical in nature.
Communication technologies apply branches of mathematics that may be very old (e.
Discrete mathematics is useful in many areas of computer science, such as complexity theory, information theory, and graph theory.
In 1998, the Kepler conjecture on sphere packing seemed to also be partially proven by computer.
The field of statistics is a mathematical application that is employed for the collection and processing of data samples, using procedures based on mathematical methods such as, and especially, probability theory.
Statisticians generate data with random sampling or randomized experiments.
Statistical theory studies decision problems such as minimizing the risk (expected loss) of a statistical action, such as using a procedure in, for example, parameter estimation, hypothesis testing, and selecting the best.
In these traditional areas of mathematical statistics, a statistical-decision problem is formulated by minimizing an objective function, like expected loss or cost, under specific constraints.
For example, designing a survey often involves minimizing the cost of estimating a population mean with a given level of confidence.
Because of its use of optimization, the mathematical theory of statistics overlaps with other decision sciences, such as operations research, control theory, and mathematical economics.
Biology uses probability extensively in fields such as ecology or neurobiology.
Most discussion of probability centers on the concept of evolutionary fitness.
Ecology heavily uses modeling to simulate population dynamics, study ecosystems such as the predator-prey model, measure pollution diffusion, or to assess climate change.
The dynamics of a population can be modeled by coupled differential equations, such as the Lotka–Volterra equations.
Statistical hypothesis testing is run on data from clinical trials to determine whether a new treatment works.
Since the start of the 20th century, chemistry has used computing to model molecules in three dimensions.
Structural geology and climatology use probabilistic models to predict the risk of natural catastrophes.
Similarly, meteorology, oceanography, and planetology also use mathematics due to their heavy use of models.
Areas of mathematics used in the social sciences include probability/statistics and differential equations.
These are used in linguistics, economics, sociology, and psychology.
Often the fundamental postulate of mathematical economics is that of the rational individual actor – Homo economicus (lit.
In this model, the individual seeks to maximize their self-interest, and always makes optimal choices using perfect information.
This atomistic view of economics allows it to relatively easily mathematize its thinking, because individual calculations are transposed into mathematical calculations.
Such mathematical modeling allows one to probe economic mechanisms.
Some reject or criticize the concept of Homo economicus.
Economists note that real people have limited information, make poor choices, and care about fairness and altruism, not just personal gain.
Without mathematical modeling, it is hard to go beyond statistical observations or untestable speculation.
Mathematical modeling allows economists to create structured frameworks to test hypotheses and analyze complex interactions.
Models provide clarity and precision, enabling the translation of theoretical concepts into quantifiable predictions that can be tested against real-world data.
At the start of the 20th century, there was a development to express historical movements in formulas.
In 1922, Nikolai Kondratiev discerned the ~50-year-long Kondratiev cycle, which explains phases of economic growth or crisis.
Towards the end of the 19th century, mathematicians extended their analysis into geopolitics.
Peter Turchin developed cliodynamics in the 1990s.
Mathematization of the social sciences is not without risk.
In the controversial book Fashionable Nonsense (1997), Sokal and Bricmont denounced the unfounded or abusive use of scientific terminology, particularly from mathematics or physics, in the social sciences.
The study of complex systems (evolution of unemployment, business capital, demographic evolution of a population, etc.
However, the choice of counting criteria, particularly for unemployment, or of models, can be subject to controversy.
The connection between mathematics and material reality has led to philosophical debates since at least the time of Pythagoras.
The ancient philosopher Plato argued that abstractions that reflect material reality have themselves a reality that exists outside space and time.
As a result, the philosophical view that mathematical objects somehow exist on their own in abstraction is often referred to as Platonism.
Independently of their possible philosophical opinions, modern mathematicians may be generally considered as Platonists, since they think of and talk of their objects of study as real objects.
Armand Borel summarized this view of mathematics reality as follows, and provided quotations of G.
Hardy, Charles Hermite, Henri Poincaré and Albert Einstein that support his views.
Something becomes objective (as opposed to "subjective") as soon as we are convinced that it exists in the minds of others in the same form as it does in ours and that we can think about it and discuss it together.
Because the language of mathematics is so precise, it is ideally suited to defining concepts for which such a consensus exists.
In my opinion, that is sufficient to provide us with a feeling of an objective existence, of a reality of mathematics .
Nevertheless, Platonism and the concurrent views on abstraction do not explain the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics (as Platonism assumes mathematics exists independently, but does not explain why it matches reality).
There is no general consensus about the definition of mathematics or its epistemological status—that is, its place inside knowledge.
A great many professional mathematicians take no interest in a definition of mathematics, or consider it undefinable.
There is not even consensus on whether mathematics is an art or a science.
Some just say, "mathematics is what mathematicians do".
A common approach is to define mathematics by its object of study.
Aristotle defined mathematics as "the science of quantity" and this definition prevailed until the 18th century.
However, Aristotle also noted a focus on quantity alone may not distinguish mathematics from sciences like physics; in his view, abstraction and studying quantity as a property "separable in thought" from real instances set mathematics apart.
In the 19th century, when mathematicians began to address topics—such as infinite sets—which have no clear-cut relation to physical reality, a variety of new definitions were given.
With the large number of new areas of mathematics that have appeared since the beginning of the 20th century, defining mathematics by its object of study has become increasingly difficult.
Nodes of this network are closely bound to procedures useful in human activities and to questions arising in science.
The transition from activities to the formal Mathematical systems is guided by a variety of general insights and ideas.
Another approach for defining mathematics is to use its methods.
For example, an area of study is often qualified as mathematics as soon as one can prove theorems—assertions whose validity relies on a proof, that is, a purely logical deduction.
Mathematical reasoning requires rigor.
This means that the definitions must be absolutely unambiguous and the proofs must be reducible to a succession of applications of inference rules, without any use of empirical evidence and intuition.
Rigorous reasoning is not specific to mathematics, but, in mathematics, the standard of rigor is much higher than elsewhere.
Despite mathematics' concision, rigorous proofs can require hundreds of pages to express, such as the 255-page Feit–Thompson theorem.
The emergence of computer-assisted proofs has allowed proof lengths to further expand.
The result of this trend is a philosophy of the quasi-empiricist proof that can not be considered infallible, but has a probability attached to it.
The concept of rigor in mathematics dates back to ancient Greece, where their society encouraged logical, deductive reasoning.
However, this rigorous approach would tend to discourage exploration of new approaches, such as irrational numbers and concepts of infinity.
The method of demonstrating rigorous proof was enhanced in the sixteenth century through the use of symbolic notation.
In the 18th century, social transition led to mathematicians earning their keep through teaching, which led to more careful thinking about the underlying concepts of mathematics.
This produced more rigorous approaches, while transitioning from geometric methods to algebraic and then arithmetic proofs.
At the end of the 19th century, it appeared that the definitions of the basic concepts of mathematics were not accurate enough for avoiding paradoxes (non-Euclidean geometries and Weierstrass function) and contradictions (Russell's paradox).
This was solved by the inclusion of axioms with the apodictic inference rules of mathematical theories; the re-introduction of axiomatic method pioneered by the ancient Greeks.
It results that "rigor" is no more a relevant concept in mathematics, as a proof is either correct or erroneous, and a "rigorous proof" is simply a pleonasm.
Where a special concept of rigor comes into play is in the socialized aspects of a proof, wherein it may be demonstrably refuted by other mathematicians.
After a proof has been accepted for many years or even decades, it can then be considered as reliable.
Nevertheless, the concept of "rigor" may remain useful for teaching to beginners what is a mathematical proof.
Mathematics has a remarkable ability to cross cultural boundaries and time periods.
As a human activity, the practice of mathematics has a social side, which includes education, careers, recognition, popularization, and so on.
In education, mathematics is a core part of the curriculum and forms an important element of the STEM academic disciplines.
Prominent careers for professional mathematicians include mathematics teacher or professor, statistician, actuary, financial analyst, economist, accountant, commodity trader, or computer consultant.
Archaeological evidence shows that instruction in mathematics occurred as early as the second millennium BCE in ancient Babylonia.
Comparable evidence has been unearthed for scribal mathematics training in the ancient Near East and then for the Greco-Roman world starting around 300 BCE.
The oldest known mathematics textbook is the Rhind papyrus, dated from c.
Due to a scarcity of books, mathematical teachings in ancient India were communicated using memorized oral tradition since the Vedic period (c.
In Imperial China during the Tang dynasty (618–907 CE), a mathematics curriculum was adopted for the civil service exam to join the state bureaucracy.
Following the Dark Ages, mathematics education in Europe was provided by religious schools as part of the Quadrivium.
Formal instruction in pedagogy began with Jesuit schools in the 16th and 17th century.
Most mathematical curricula remained at a basic and practical level until the nineteenth century, when it began to flourish in France and Germany.
The oldest journal addressing instruction in mathematics was L'Enseignement Mathématique, which began publication in 1899.
The Western advancements in science and technology led to the establishment of centralized education systems in many nation-states, with mathematics as a core component—initially for its military applications.
While the content of courses varies, in the present day nearly all countries teach mathematics to students for significant amounts of time.
During school, mathematical capabilities and positive expectations have a strong association with career interest in the field.
Extrinsic factors such as feedback motivation by teachers, parents, and peer groups can influence the level of interest in mathematics.
Some students studying mathematics may develop an apprehension or fear about their performance in the subject.
This is known as mathematical anxiety, and is considered the most prominent of the disorders impacting academic performance.
Mathematical anxiety can develop due to various factors such as parental and teacher attitudes, social stereotypes, and personal traits.
Help to counteract the anxiety can come from changes in instructional approaches, by interactions with parents and teachers, and by tailored treatments for the individual.
The validity of a mathematical theorem relies only on the rigor of its proof, which could theoretically be done automatically by a computer program.
This does not mean that there is no place for creativity in a mathematical work.
On the contrary, many important mathematical results (theorems) are solutions of problems that other mathematicians failed to solve, and the invention of a way for solving them may be a fundamental way of the solving process.
An extreme example is Apery's theorem: Roger Apery provided only the ideas for a proof, and the formal proof was given only several months later by three other mathematicians.
Creativity and rigor are not the only psychological aspects of the activity of mathematicians.
Some mathematicians can see their activity as a game, more specifically as solving puzzles.
This aspect of mathematical activity is emphasized in recreational mathematics.
Mathematicians can find an aesthetic value to mathematics.
Like beauty, it is hard to define, it is commonly related to elegance, which involves qualities like simplicity, symmetry, completeness, and generality.
Hardy in A Mathematician's Apology expressed the belief that the aesthetic considerations are, in themselves, sufficient to justify the study of pure mathematics.
He also identified other criteria such as significance, unexpectedness, and inevitability, which contribute to mathematical aesthetics.
Paul Erdős expressed this sentiment more ironically by speaking of "The Book", a supposed divine collection of the most beautiful proofs.
The 1998 book Proofs from THE BOOK, inspired by Erdős, is a collection of particularly succinct and revelatory mathematical arguments.
Some examples of particularly elegant results included are Euclid's proof that there are infinitely many prime numbers and the fast Fourier transform for harmonic analysis.
Some feel that to consider mathematics a science is to downplay its artistry and history in the seven traditional liberal arts.
One way this difference of viewpoint plays out is in the philosophical debate as to whether mathematical results are created (as in art) or discovered (as in science).
The popularity of recreational mathematics is another sign of the pleasure many find in solving mathematical questions.
Notes that sound well together to a Western ear are sounds whose fundamental frequencies of vibration are in simple ratios.
Humans, as well as some other animals, find symmetric patterns to be more beautiful.
Mathematically, the symmetries of an object form a group known as the symmetry group.
A Rorschach test is a figure invariant by this symmetry, as are butterfly and animal bodies more generally (at least on the surface).
Waves on the sea surface possess translation symmetry: moving one's viewpoint by the distance between wave crests does not change one's view of the sea.
Fractals possess self-similarity.
Popular mathematics is the act of presenting mathematics without technical terms.
Presenting mathematics may be hard since the general public suffers from mathematical anxiety and mathematical objects are highly abstract.
However, popular mathematics writing can overcome this by using applications or cultural links.
Despite this, mathematics is rarely the topic of popularization in printed or televised media.
The most prestigious award in mathematics is the Fields Medal, established by Canadian John Charles Fields in 1936 and awarded every four years (except around World War II) to up to four individuals.
It is considered the mathematical equivalent of the Nobel Prize.
A famous list of 23 open problems, called "Hilbert's problems", was compiled in 1900 by German mathematician David Hilbert.
This list has achieved great celebrity among mathematicians, and at least thirteen of the problems (depending how some are interpreted) have been solved.
A new list of seven important problems, titled the "Millennium Prize Problems", was published in 2000.
Only one of them, the Riemann hypothesis, duplicates one of Hilbert's problems.
A solution to any of these problems carries a 1 million dollar reward.
To date, only one of these problems, the Poincaré conjecture, has been solved, by the Russian mathematician Grigori Perelman.
Arithmetic is an elementary branch of mathematics that deals with numerical operations like addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
In a wider sense, it also includes exponentiation, extraction of roots, and taking logarithms.
Arithmetic systems can be distinguished based on the type of numbers they operate on.
Integer arithmetic is about calculations with positive and negative integers.
Rational number arithmetic involves operations on fractions of integers.
Real number arithmetic is about calculations with real numbers, which include both rational and irrational numbers.
Another distinction is based on the numeral system employed to perform calculations.
Decimal arithmetic is the most common.
It uses the basic numerals from 0 to 9 and their combinations to express numbers.
Binary arithmetic, by contrast, is used by most computers and represents numbers as combinations of the basic numerals 0 and 1.
Computer arithmetic deals with the specificities of the implementation of binary arithmetic on computers.
Some arithmetic systems operate on mathematical objects other than numbers, such as interval arithmetic and matrix arithmetic.
Arithmetic operations form the basis of many branches of mathematics, such as algebra, calculus, and statistics.
They play a similar role in the sciences, like physics and economics.
Arithmetic is present in many aspects of daily life, for example, to calculate change while shopping or to manage personal finances.
It is one of the earliest forms of mathematics education that students encounter.
Its cognitive and conceptual foundations are studied by psychology and philosophy.
The practice of arithmetic is at least thousands and possibly tens of thousands of years old.
Ancient civilizations like the Egyptians and the Sumerians invented numeral systems to solve practical arithmetic problems in about 3000 BCE.
Starting in the 7th and 6th centuries BCE, the ancient Greeks initiated a more abstract study of numbers and introduced the method of rigorous mathematical proofs.
The ancient Indians developed the concept of zero and the decimal system, which Arab mathematicians further refined and spread to the Western world during the medieval period.
The first mechanical calculators were invented in the 17th century.
The 18th and 19th centuries saw the development of modern number theory and the formulation of axiomatic foundations of arithmetic.
In the 20th century, the emergence of electronic calculators and computers revolutionized the accuracy and speed with which arithmetic calculations could be performed.
Arithmetic is the fundamental branch of mathematics that studies numbers and their operations.
In particular, it deals with numerical calculations using the arithmetic operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
In a wider sense, it also includes exponentiation, extraction of roots, and logarithm.
The term arithmetic has its root in the Latin term arithmetica which derives from the Ancient Greek words ἀριθμός (arithmos), meaning 'number', and ἀριθμητική τέχνη (arithmetike tekhne), meaning 'the art of counting'.
There are disagreements about its precise definition.
According to a narrow characterization, arithmetic deals only with natural numbers.
However, the more common view is to include operations on integers, rational numbers, real numbers, and sometimes also complex numbers in its scope.
Some definitions restrict arithmetic to the field of numerical calculations.
When understood in a wider sense, it also includes the study of how the concept of numbers developed, the analysis of properties of and relations between numbers, and the examination of the axiomatic structure of arithmetic operations.
Arithmetic is closely related to number theory and some authors use the terms as synonyms.
However, in a more specific sense, number theory is restricted to the study of integers and focuses on their properties and relationships such as divisibility, factorization, and primality.
Traditionally, it is known as higher arithmetic.
Numbers are mathematical objects used to count quantities and measure magnitudes.
They are fundamental elements in arithmetic since all arithmetic operations are performed on numbers.
There are different kinds of numbers and different numeral systems to represent them.
The main kinds of numbers employed in arithmetic are natural numbers, whole numbers, integers, rational numbers, and real numbers.
The natural numbers are whole numbers that start from 1 and go to infinity.
They exclude 0 and negative numbers.
The whole numbers are identical to the natural numbers with the only difference being that they include 0.
Some mathematicians do not draw the distinction between the natural and the whole numbers by including 0 in the set of natural numbers.
The set of integers encompasses both positive and negative whole numbers.
Based on how natural and whole numbers are used, they can be distinguished into cardinal and ordinal numbers.
Cardinal numbers, like one, two, and three, are numbers that express the quantity of objects.
They answer the question "how many?
Ordinal numbers, such as first, second, and third, indicate order or placement in a series.
They answer the question "what position?
A number is rational if it can be represented as the ratio of two integers.
The set of rational numbers includes all integers, which are fractions with a denominator of 1.
Decimal fractions like 0.
Every rational number corresponds to a finite or a repeating decimal.
Irrational numbers are numbers that cannot be expressed through the ratio of two integers.
They are often required to describe geometric magnitudes.
The decimal representation of an irrational number is infinite without repeating decimals.
The set of rational numbers together with the set of irrational numbers makes up the set of real numbers.
Even wider classes of numbers include complex numbers and quaternions.
A numeral is a symbol to represent a number and numeral systems are representational frameworks.
They usually have a limited amount of basic numerals, which directly refer to certain numbers.
The system governs how these basic numerals may be combined to express any number.
Numeral systems are either positional or non-positional.
All early numeral systems were non-positional.
For non-positional numeral systems, the value of a digit does not depend on its position in the numeral.
The simplest non-positional system is the unary numeral system.
It relies on one symbol for the number 1.
All higher numbers are written by repeating this symbol.
For example, the number 7 can be represented by repeating the symbol for 1 seven times.
This system makes it cumbersome to write large numbers, which is why many non-positional systems include additional symbols to directly represent larger numbers.
Variations of the unary numeral systems are employed in tally sticks using dents and in tally marks.
Egyptian hieroglyphics had a more complex non-positional numeral system.
They have additional symbols for numbers like 10, 100, 1000, and 10,000.
These symbols can be combined into a sum to more conveniently express larger numbers.
For instance, the numeral for 10,405 uses one time the symbol for 10,000, four times the symbol for 100, and five times the symbol for 1.
A similar well-known framework is the Roman numeral system.
It has the symbols I, V, X, L, C, D, M as its basic numerals to represent the numbers 1, 5, 10, 50, 100, 500, and 1000.
A numeral system is positional if the position of a basic numeral in a compound expression determines its value.
Positional numeral systems have a radix that acts as a multiplicand of the different positions.
For each subsequent position, the radix is raised to a higher power.
In the common decimal system, also called the Hindu–Arabic numeral system, the radix is 10.
Because of the effect of the digits' positions, the numeral 532 differs from the numerals 325 and 253 even though they have the same digits.
Another positional numeral system used extensively in computer arithmetic is the binary system, which has a radix of 2.
In computing, each digit in the binary notation corresponds to one bit.
The earliest positional system was developed by ancient Babylonians and had a radix of 60.
Arithmetic operations are ways of combining, transforming, or manipulating numbers.
They are functions that have numbers both as input and output.
The most important operations in arithmetic are addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
Further operations include exponentiation, extraction of roots, and logarithm.
If these operations are performed on variables rather than numbers, they are sometimes referred to as algebraic operations.
Two important concepts in relation to arithmetic operations are identity elements and inverse elements.
The identity element or neutral element of an operation does not cause any change if it is applied to another element.
For example, the identity element of addition is 0 since any sum of a number and 0 results in the same number.
The inverse element is the element that results in the identity element when combined with another element.
For instance, the additive inverse of the number 6 is -6 since their sum is 0.
There are not only inverse elements but also inverse operations.
In an informal sense, one operation is the inverse of another operation if it undoes the first operation.
Commutativity and associativity are laws governing the order in which some arithmetic operations can be carried out.
An operation is commutative if the order of the arguments can be changed without affecting the results.
Associativity is a rule that affects the order in which a series of operations can be carried out.
An operation is associative if, in a series of two operations, it does not matter which operation is carried out first.
Addition is an arithmetic operation in which two numbers, called the addends, are combined into a single number, called the sum.
The term summation is used if several additions are performed in a row.
Counting is a type of repeated addition in which the number 1 is continuously added.
Subtraction is the inverse of addition.
In it, one number, known as the subtrahend, is taken away from another, known as the minuend.
The result of this operation is called the difference.
Subtraction is often treated as a special case of addition: instead of subtracting a positive number, it is also possible to add a negative number.
This helps to simplify mathematical computations by reducing the number of basic arithmetic operations needed to perform calculations.
The additive identity element is 0 and the additive inverse of a number is the negative of that number.
Addition is both commutative and associative.
Multiplication is an arithmetic operation in which two numbers, called the multiplier and the multiplicand, are combined into a single number called the product.
Division is the inverse of multiplication.
In it, one number, known as the dividend, is split into several equal parts by another number, known as the divisor.
The result of this operation is called the quotient.
Division is often treated as a special case of multiplication: instead of dividing by a number, it is also possible to multiply by its reciprocal.
The reciprocal of a number is 1 divided by that number.
The multiplicative identity element is 1 and the multiplicative inverse of a number is the reciprocal of that number.
Multiplication is both commutative and associative.
Exponentiation is an arithmetic operation in which a number, known as the base, is raised to the power of another number, known as the exponent.
The result of this operation is called the power.
Exponentiation is sometimes expressed using the symbol ^ but the more common way is to write the exponent in superscript right after the base.
Roots are a special type of exponentiation using a fractional exponent.
Logarithm is the inverse of exponentiation.
Exponentiation and logarithm do not have general identity elements and inverse elements like addition and multiplication.
However, exponentiation does not have a general identity element since 1 is not the neutral element for the base.
Exponentiation and logarithm are neither commutative nor associative.
Different types of arithmetic systems are discussed in the academic literature.
They differ from each other based on what type of number they operate on, what numeral system they use to represent them, and whether they operate on mathematical objects other than numbers.
Integer arithmetic is the branch of arithmetic that deals with the manipulation of positive and negative whole numbers.
Simple one-digit operations can be performed by following or memorizing a table that presents the results of all possible combinations, like an addition table or a multiplication table.
Other common methods are verbal counting and finger-counting.
For operations on numbers with more than one digit, different techniques can be employed to calculate the result by using several one-digit operations in a row.
For example, in the method addition with carries, the two numbers are written one above the other.
Starting from the rightmost digit, each pair of digits is added together.
The rightmost digit of the sum is written below them.
If the sum is a two-digit number then the leftmost digit, called the "carry", is added to the next pair of digits to the left.
This process is repeated until all digits have been added.
Other methods used for integer additions are the number line method, the partial sum method, and the compensation method.
A similar technique is utilized for subtraction: it also starts with the rightmost digit and uses a "borrow" or a negative carry for the column on the left if the result of the one-digit subtraction is negative.
A basic technique of integer multiplication employs repeated addition.
A common technique for multiplication with larger numbers is called long multiplication.
This method starts by writing the multiplier above the multiplicand.
The calculation begins by multiplying the multiplier only with the rightmost digit of the multiplicand and writing the result below, starting in the rightmost column.
The same is done for each digit of the multiplicand and the result in each case is shifted one position to the left.
As a final step, all the individual products are added to arrive at the total product of the two multi-digit numbers.
Other techniques used for multiplication are the grid method and the lattice method.
Computer science is interested in multiplication algorithms with a low computational complexity to be able to efficiently multiply very large integers, such as the Karatsuba algorithm, the Schönhage–Strassen algorithm, and the Toom–Cook algorithm.
A common technique used for division is called long division.
Other methods include short division and chunking.
Integer arithmetic is not closed under division.
This means that when dividing one integer by another integer, the result is not always an integer.
For instance, 7 divided by 2 is not a whole number but 3.
One way to ensure that the result is an integer is to round the result to a whole number.
However, this method leads to inaccuracies as the original value is altered.
Another method is to perform the division only partially and retain the remainder.
For example, 7 divided by 2 is 3 with a remainder of 1.
These difficulties are avoided by rational number arithmetic, which allows for the exact representation of fractions.
A simple method to calculate exponentiation is by repeated multiplication.
A more efficient technique used for large exponents is exponentiation by squaring.
It breaks down the calculation into a number of squaring operations.
By taking advantage of repeated squaring operations, only 7 individual operations are needed rather than the 64 operations required for regular repeated multiplication.
Methods to calculate logarithms include the Taylor series and continued fractions.
Integer arithmetic is not closed under logarithm and under exponentiation with negative exponents, meaning that the result of these operations is not always an integer.
Number theory studies the structure and properties of integers as well as the relations and laws between them.
Some of the main branches of modern number theory include elementary number theory, analytic number theory, algebraic number theory, and geometric number theory.
Elementary number theory studies aspects of integers that can be investigated using elementary methods.
Its topics include divisibility, factorization, and primality.
Analytic number theory, by contrast, relies on techniques from analysis and calculus.
It examines problems like how prime numbers are distributed and the claim that every even number is a sum of two prime numbers.
Algebraic number theory employs algebraic structures to analyze the properties of and relations between numbers.
Examples are the use of fields and rings, as in algebraic number fields like the ring of integers.
Geometric number theory uses concepts from geometry to study numbers.
For instance, it investigates how lattice points with integer coordinates behave in a plane.
Further branches of number theory are probabilistic number theory, which employs methods from probability theory, combinatorial number theory, which relies on the field of combinatorics, computational number theory, which approaches number-theoretic problems with computational methods, and applied number theory, which examines the application of number theory to fields like physics, biology, and cryptography.
Influential theorems in number theory include the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, Euclid's theorem, and Fermat's Last Theorem.
According to the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, every integer greater than 1 is either a prime number or can be represented as a unique product of prime numbers.
The number 19, by contrast, is a prime number that has no other prime factorization.
Euclid's theorem states that there are infinitely many prime numbers.
Rational number arithmetic is the branch of arithmetic that deals with the manipulation of numbers that can be expressed as a ratio of two integers.
Most arithmetic operations on rational numbers can be calculated by performing a series of integer arithmetic operations on the numerators and the denominators of the involved numbers.
If two rational numbers have the same denominator then they can be added by adding their numerators and keeping the common denominator.
A similar procedure is used for subtraction.
If the two numbers do not have the same denominator then they must be transformed to find a common denominator.
This can be achieved by scaling the first number with the denominator of the second number while scaling the second number with the denominator of the first number.
Dividing one rational number by another can be achieved by multiplying the first number with the reciprocal of the second number.
This means that the numerator and the denominator of the second number change position.
Unlike integer arithmetic, rational number arithmetic is closed under division as long as the divisor is not 0.
Both integer arithmetic and rational number arithmetic are not closed under exponentiation and logarithm.
One way to calculate exponentiation with a fractional exponent is to perform two separate calculations: one exponentiation using the numerator of the exponent followed by drawing the nth root of the result based on the denominator of the exponent.
The first operation can be completed using methods like repeated multiplication or exponentiation by squaring.
One way to get an approximate result for the second operation is to employ Newton's method, which uses a series of steps to gradually refine an initial guess until it reaches the desired level of accuracy.
The Taylor series or the continued fraction method can be utilized to calculate logarithms.
The decimal fraction notation is a special way of representing rational numbers whose denominator is a power of 10.
Modified versions of integer calculation methods like addition with carry and long multiplication can be applied to calculations with decimal fractions.
Not all rational numbers have a finite representation in the decimal notation.
The shortened notation for this type of repeating decimal is 0.
Every repeating decimal expresses a rational number.
Real number arithmetic is the branch of arithmetic that deals with the manipulation of both rational and irrational numbers.
Irrational numbers are numbers that cannot be expressed through fractions or repeated decimals, like the root of 2 and π.
Unlike rational number arithmetic, real number arithmetic is closed under exponentiation as long as it uses a positive number as its base.
The same is true for the logarithm of positive real numbers as long as the logarithm base is positive and not 1.
Irrational numbers involve an infinite non-repeating series of decimal digits.
In cases where absolute precision is not required, the problem of calculating arithmetic operations on real numbers is usually addressed by truncation or rounding.
For truncation, a certain number of leftmost digits are kept and remaining digits are discarded or replaced by zeros.
For example, the number π has an infinite number of digits starting with 3.
If this number is truncated to 4 decimal places, the result is 3.
Rounding is a similar process in which the last preserved digit is increased by one if the next digit is 5 or greater but remains the same if the next digit is less than 5, so that the rounded number is the best approximation of a given precision for the original number.
For instance, if the number π is rounded to 4 decimal places, the result is 3.
These methods allow computers to efficiently perform approximate calculations on real numbers.
In science and engineering, numbers represent estimates of physical quantities derived from measurement or modeling.
One basic way to express the degree of certainty about each number's value and avoid false precision is to round each measurement to a certain number of digits, called significant digits, which are implied to be accurate.
For example, a person's height measured with a tape measure might only be precisely known to the nearest centimeter, so should be presented as 1.
If converted to imperial units, this quantity should be rounded to 64 inches or 63.
When a number is written using ordinary decimal notation, leading zeros are not significant, and trailing zeros of numbers not written with a decimal point are implicitly considered to be non-significant.
For example, the numbers 0.
Representing uncertainty using only significant digits is a relatively crude method, with some unintuitive subtleties; explicitly keeping track of an estimate or upper bound of the approximation error is a more sophisticated approach.
In the example, the person's height might be represented as 1.
In performing calculations with uncertain quantities, the uncertainty should be propagated to calculated quantities.
When adding or subtracting two or more quantities, add the absolute uncertainties of each summand together to obtain the absolute uncertainty of the sum.
When multiplying or dividing two or more quantities, add the relative uncertainties of each factor together to obtain the relative uncertainty of the product.
When representing uncertainty by significant digits, uncertainty can be coarsely propagated by rounding the result of adding or subtracting two or more quantities to the leftmost last significant decimal place among the summands, and by rounding the result of multiplying or dividing two or more quantities to the least number of significant digits among the factors.
More sophisticated methods of dealing with uncertain values include interval arithmetic and affine arithmetic.
Interval arithmetic describes operations on intervals.
Intervals can be used to represent a range of values if one does not know the precise magnitude, for example, because of measurement errors.
It is closely related to affine arithmetic, which aims to give more precise results by performing calculations on affine forms rather than intervals.
An affine form is a number together with error terms that describe how the number may deviate from the actual magnitude.
The precision of numerical quantities can be expressed uniformly using normalized scientific notation, which is also convenient for concisely representing numbers which are much larger or smaller than 1.
Using scientific notation, a number is decomposed into the product of a number between 1 and 10, called the significand, and 10 raised to some integer power, called the exponent.
The significand consists of the significant digits of the number, and is written as a leading digit 1–9 followed by a decimal point and a sequence of digits 0–9.
Unlike ordinary decimal notation, where trailing zeros of large numbers are implicitly considered to be non-significant, in scientific notation every digit in the significand is considered significant, and adding trailing zeros indicates higher precision.
A common method employed by computers to approximate real number arithmetic is called floating-point arithmetic.
It represents real numbers similar to the scientific notation through three numbers: a significand, a base, and an exponent.
The precision of the significand is limited by the number of bits allocated to represent it.
If an arithmetic operation results in a number that requires more bits than are available, the computer rounds the result to the closest representable number.
This leads to rounding errors.
A consequence of this behavior is that certain laws of arithmetic are violated by floating-point arithmetic.
For example, floating-point addition is not associative since the rounding errors introduced can depend on the order of the additions.
The most common technical standard used for floating-point arithmetic is called IEEE 754.
Among other things, it determines how numbers are represented, how arithmetic operations and rounding are performed, and how errors and exceptions are handled.
In cases where computation speed is not a limiting factor, it is possible to use arbitrary-precision arithmetic, for which the precision of calculations is only restricted by the computer's memory.
Forms of arithmetic can also be distinguished by the tools employed to perform calculations and include many approaches besides the regular use of pen and paper.
Mental arithmetic relies exclusively on the mind without external tools.
Instead, it utilizes visualization, memorization, and certain calculation techniques to solve arithmetic problems.
One such technique is the compensation method, which consists in altering the numbers to make the calculation easier and then adjusting the result afterward.
Mental arithmetic is often taught in primary education to train the numerical abilities of the students.
The human body can also be employed as an arithmetic tool.
The use of hands in finger counting is often introduced to young children to teach them numbers and simple calculations.
In its most basic form, the number of extended fingers corresponds to the represented quantity and arithmetic operations like addition and subtraction are performed by extending or retracting fingers.
This system is limited to small numbers compared to more advanced systems which employ different approaches to represent larger quantities.
The human voice is used as an arithmetic aid in verbal counting.
Tally marks are a simple system based on external tools other than the body.
This system relies on mark making, such as strokes drawn on a surface or notches carved into a wooden stick, to keep track of quantities.
Some forms of tally marks arrange the strokes in groups of five to make them easier to read.
The abacus is a more advanced tool to represent numbers and perform calculations.
An abacus usually consists of a series of rods, each holding several beads.
Each bead represents a quantity, which is counted if the bead is moved from one end of a rod to the other.
Calculations happen by manipulating the positions of beads until the final bead pattern reveals the result.
Related aids include counting boards, which use tokens whose value depends on the area on the board in which they are placed, and counting rods, which are arranged in horizontal and vertical patterns to represent different numbers.
Sectors and slide rules are more refined calculating instruments that rely on geometric relationships between different scales to perform both basic and advanced arithmetic operations.
Printed tables were particularly relevant as an aid to look up the results of operations like logarithm and trigonometric functions.
Mechanical calculators automate manual calculation processes.
They present the user with some form of input device to enter numbers by turning dials or pressing keys.
They include an internal mechanism usually consisting of gears, levers, and wheels to perform calculations and display the results.
For electronic calculators and computers, this procedure is further refined by replacing the mechanical components with electronic circuits like microprocessors that combine and transform electric signals to perform calculations.
There are many other types of arithmetic.
Modular arithmetic operates on a finite set of numbers.
If an operation would result in a number outside this finite set then the number is adjusted back into the set, similar to how the hands of clocks start at the beginning again after having completed one cycle.
The number at which this adjustment happens is called the modulus.
For example, a regular clock has a modulus of 12.
In the case of adding 4 to 9, this means that the result is not 13 but 1.
The same principle applies also to other operations, such as subtraction, multiplication, and division.
Some forms of arithmetic deal with operations performed on mathematical objects other than numbers.
Interval arithmetic describes operations on intervals.
Vector arithmetic and matrix arithmetic describe arithmetic operations on vectors and matrices, like vector addition and matrix multiplication.
Arithmetic systems can be classified based on the numeral system they rely on.
For instance, decimal arithmetic describes arithmetic operations in the decimal system.
Other examples are binary arithmetic, octal arithmetic, and hexadecimal arithmetic.
Compound unit arithmetic describes arithmetic operations performed on magnitudes with compound units.
It involves additional operations to govern the transformation between single unit and compound unit quantities.
For example, the operation of reduction is used to transform the compound quantity 1 h 90 min into the single unit quantity 150 min.
They can be employed to represent some real-world situations in modern physics and everyday life.
Axiomatic foundations of arithmetic try to provide a small set of laws, called axioms, from which all fundamental properties of and operations on numbers can be derived.
They constitute logically consistent and systematic frameworks that can be used to formulate mathematical proofs in a rigorous manner.
Two well-known approaches are the Dedekind–Peano axioms and set-theoretic constructions.
The Dedekind–Peano axioms provide an axiomatization of the arithmetic of natural numbers.
Their basic principles were first formulated by Richard Dedekind and later refined by Giuseppe Peano.
They rely only on a small number of primitive mathematical concepts, such as 0, natural number, and successor.
The Peano axioms determine how these concepts are related to each other.
All other arithmetic concepts can then be defined in terms of these primitive concepts.
For every natural number, there is a successor, which is also a natural number.
The successors of two different natural numbers are never identical.
If a set contains 0 and every successor then it contains every natural number.
Arithmetic operations can be defined as mechanisms that affect how the successor function is applied.
Various axiomatizations of arithmetic rely on set theory.
They cover natural numbers but can also be extended to integers, rational numbers, and real numbers.
Each natural number is represented by a unique set.
Each subsequent number can be defined as the union of the previous number with the set containing the previous number.
Integers can be defined as ordered pairs of natural numbers where the second number is subtracted from the first one.
For instance, the pair (9, 0) represents the number 9 while the pair (0, 9) represents the number −9.
Rational numbers are defined as pairs of integers where the first number represents the numerator and the second number represents the denominator.
One way to construct the real numbers relies on the concept of Dedekind cuts.
According to this approach, each real number is represented by a partition of all rational numbers into two sets, one for all numbers below the represented real number and the other for the rest.
Arithmetic operations are defined as functions that perform various set-theoretic transformations on the sets representing the input numbers to arrive at the set representing the result.
The earliest forms of arithmetic are sometimes traced back to counting and tally marks used to keep track of quantities.
Some historians suggest that the Lebombo bone (dated about 43,000 years ago) and the Ishango bone (dated about 22,000 to 30,000 years ago) are the oldest arithmetic artifacts but this interpretation is disputed.
However, a basic sense of numbers may predate these findings and might even have existed before the development of language.
It was not until the emergence of ancient civilizations that a more complex and structured approach to arithmetic began to evolve, starting around 3000 BCE.
This became necessary because of the increased need to keep track of stored items, manage land ownership, and arrange exchanges.
All the major ancient civilizations developed non-positional numeral systems to facilitate the representation of numbers.
They also had symbols for operations like addition and subtraction and were aware of fractions.
Examples are Egyptian hieroglyphics as well as the numeral systems invented in Sumeria, China, and India.
The first positional numeral system was developed by the Babylonians starting around 1800 BCE.
This was a significant improvement over earlier numeral systems since it made the representation of large numbers and calculations on them more efficient.
Abacuses have been utilized as hand-operated calculating tools since ancient times as efficient means for performing complex calculations.
Early civilizations primarily used numbers for concrete practical purposes, like commercial activities and tax records, but lacked an abstract concept of number itself.
This changed with the ancient Greek mathematicians, who began to explore the abstract nature of numbers rather than studying how they are applied to specific problems.
Another novel feature was their use of proofs to establish mathematical truths and validate theories.
A further contribution was their distinction of various classes of numbers, such as even numbers, odd numbers, and prime numbers.
This included the discovery that numbers for certain geometrical lengths are irrational and therefore cannot be expressed as a fraction.
The works of Thales of Miletus and Pythagoras in the 7th and 6th centuries BCE are often regarded as the inception of Greek mathematics.
Diophantus was an influential figure in Greek arithmetic in the 3rd century CE because of his numerous contributions to number theory and his exploration of the application of arithmetic operations to algebraic equations.
The ancient Indians were the first to develop the concept of zero as a number to be used in calculations.
The exact rules of its operation were written down by Brahmagupta in around 628 CE.
The concept of zero or none existed long before, but it was not considered an object of arithmetic operations.
Brahmagupta further provided a detailed discussion of calculations with negative numbers and their application to problems like credit and debt.
The concept of negative numbers itself is significantly older and was first explored in Chinese mathematics in the first millennium BCE.
Indian mathematicians also developed the positional decimal system used today, in particular the concept of a zero digit instead of empty or missing positions.
For example, a detailed treatment of its operations was provided by Aryabhata around the turn of the 6th century CE.
The Indian decimal system was further refined and expanded to non-integers during the Islamic Golden Age by Middle Eastern mathematicians, such as Al-Khwarizmi.
His work was influential in introducing the decimal numeral system to the Western world, which at that time relied on the Roman numeral system.
There, it was popularized by mathematicians like Leonardo Fibonacci, who lived in the 12th and 13th centuries and also developed the Fibonacci sequence.
During the Middle Ages and Renaissance, many popular textbooks were published to cover the practical calculations for commerce.
The use of abacuses also became widespread in this period.
In the 16th century, the mathematician Gerolamo Cardano conceived the concept of complex numbers as a way to solve cubic equations.
The first mechanical calculators were developed in the 17th century and greatly facilitated complex mathematical calculations, such as Blaise Pascal's calculator and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's stepped reckoner.
The 17th century also saw the discovery of the logarithm by John Napier.
In the 18th and 19th centuries, mathematicians such as Leonhard Euler and Carl Friedrich Gauss laid the foundations of modern number theory.
Another development in this period concerned work on the formalization and foundations of arithmetic, such as Georg Cantor's set theory and the Dedekind–Peano axioms used as an axiomatization of natural-number arithmetic.
Computers and electronic calculators were first developed in the 20th century.
Their widespread use revolutionized both the accuracy and speed with which even complex arithmetic computations could be performed.
Arithmetic education forms part of primary education.
It is one of the first forms of mathematics education that children encounter.
Elementary arithmetic aims to give students a basic sense of numbers and to familiarize them with fundamental numerical operations like addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
It is usually introduced in relation to concrete scenarios, like counting beads, dividing the class into groups of children of the same size, and calculating change when buying items.
Common tools in early arithmetic education are number lines, addition and multiplication tables, counting blocks, and abacuses.
Later stages focus on a more abstract understanding and introduce the students to different types of numbers, such as negative numbers, fractions, real numbers, and complex numbers.
They further cover more advanced numerical operations, like exponentiation, extraction of roots, and logarithm.
They also show how arithmetic operations are employed in other branches of mathematics, such as their application to describe geometrical shapes and the use of variables in algebra.
Another aspect is to teach the students the use of algorithms and calculators to solve complex arithmetic problems.
The psychology of arithmetic is interested in how humans and animals learn about numbers, represent them, and use them for calculations.
It examines how mathematical problems are understood and solved and how arithmetic abilities are related to perception, memory, judgment, and decision making.
For example, it investigates how collections of concrete items are first encountered in perception and subsequently associated with numbers.
A further field of inquiry concerns the relation between numerical calculations and the use of language to form representations.
Psychology also explores the biological origin of arithmetic as an inborn ability.
This concerns pre-verbal and pre-symbolic cognitive processes implementing arithmetic-like operations required to successfully represent the world and perform tasks like spatial navigation.
One of the concepts studied by psychology is numeracy, which is the capability to comprehend numerical concepts, apply them to concrete situations, and reason with them.
It includes a fundamental number sense as well as being able to estimate and compare quantities.
It further encompasses the abilities to symbolically represent numbers in numbering systems, interpret numerical data, and evaluate arithmetic calculations.
Numeracy is a key skill in many academic fields.
A lack of numeracy can inhibit academic success and lead to bad economic decisions in everyday life, for example, by misunderstanding mortgage plans and insurance policies.
The philosophy of arithmetic studies the fundamental concepts and principles underlying numbers and arithmetic operations.
It explores the nature and ontological status of numbers, the relation of arithmetic to language and logic, and how it is possible to acquire arithmetic knowledge.
According to Platonism, numbers have mind-independent existence: they exist as abstract objects outside spacetime and without causal powers.
This view is rejected by intuitionists, who claim that mathematical objects are mental constructions.
Further theories are logicism, which holds that mathematical truths are reducible to logical truths, and formalism, which states that mathematical principles are rules of how symbols are manipulated without claiming that they correspond to entities outside the rule-governed activity.
The traditionally dominant view in the epistemology of arithmetic is that arithmetic truths are knowable a priori.
This means that they can be known by thinking alone without the need to rely on sensory experience.
Some proponents of this view state that arithmetic knowledge is innate while others claim that there is some form of rational intuition through which mathematical truths can be apprehended.
A more recent alternative view was suggested by naturalist philosophers like Willard Van Orman Quine, who argue that mathematical principles are high-level generalizations that are ultimately grounded in the sensory world as described by the empirical sciences.
Arithmetic is relevant to many fields.
In daily life, it is required to calculate change when shopping, manage personal finances, and adjust a cooking recipe for a different number of servings.
Businesses use arithmetic to calculate profits and losses and analyze market trends.
In the field of engineering, it is used to measure quantities, calculate loads and forces, and design structures.
Cryptography relies on arithmetic operations to protect sensitive information by encrypting data and messages.
Arithmetic is intimately connected to many branches of mathematics that depend on numerical operations.
Algebra relies on arithmetic principles to solve equations using variables.
These principles also play a key role in calculus in its attempt to determine rates of change and areas under curves.
Geometry uses arithmetic operations to measure the properties of shapes while statistics utilizes them to analyze numerical data.
Due to the relevance of arithmetic operations throughout mathematics, the influence of arithmetic extends to most sciences such as physics, computer science, and economics.
These operations are used in calculations, problem-solving, data analysis, and algorithms, making them integral to scientific research, technological development, and economic modeling.
Geometry is a branch of mathematics concerned with properties of space such as the distance, shape, size, and relative position of figures.
Geometry is, along with arithmetic, one of the oldest branches of mathematics.
A mathematician who works in the field of geometry is called a geometer.
Until the 19th century, geometry was almost exclusively devoted to Euclidean geometry, which includes the notions of point, line, plane, distance, angle, surface, and curve, as fundamental concepts.
Originally developed to model the physical world, geometry has applications in almost all sciences, and also in art, architecture, and other activities that are related to graphics.
Geometry also has applications in areas of mathematics that are apparently unrelated.
For example, methods of algebraic geometry are fundamental in Wiles's proof of Fermat's Last Theorem, a problem that was stated in terms of elementary arithmetic, and remained unsolved for several centuries.
During the 19th century, several discoveries enlarged dramatically the scope of geometry.
One of the oldest such discoveries is Carl Friedrich Gauss's Theorema Egregium ("remarkable theorem") that asserts roughly that the Gaussian curvature of a surface is independent from any specific embedding in a Euclidean space.
This implies that surfaces can be studied intrinsically, that is, as stand-alone spaces, and has been expanded into the theory of manifolds and Riemannian geometry.
Later in the 19th century, it appeared that geometries without the parallel postulate (non-Euclidean geometries) can be developed without introducing any contradiction.
The geometry that underlies general relativity is a famous application of non-Euclidean geometry.
Since the late 19th century, the scope of geometry has been greatly expanded, and the field has been split in many subfields that depend on the underlying methods—differential geometry, algebraic geometry, computational geometry, algebraic topology, discrete geometry (also known as combinatorial geometry), etc.
This enlargement of the scope of geometry led to a change of meaning of the word "space", which originally referred to the three-dimensional space of the physical world and its model provided by Euclidean geometry; presently a geometric space, or simply a space is a mathematical structure on which some geometry is defined.
The earliest recorded beginnings of geometry can be traced to ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt in the 2nd millennium BC.
Early geometry was a collection of empirically discovered principles concerning lengths, angles, areas, and volumes, which were developed to meet some practical need in surveying, construction, astronomy, and various crafts.
The earliest known texts on geometry are the Egyptian Rhind Papyrus (2000–1800 BC) and Moscow Papyrus (c.
For example, the Moscow Papyrus gives a formula for calculating the volume of a truncated pyramid, or frustum.
Later clay tablets (350–50 BC) demonstrate that Babylonian astronomers implemented trapezoid procedures for computing Jupiter's position and motion within time-velocity space.
These geometric procedures anticipated the Oxford Calculators, including the mean speed theorem, by 14 centuries.
South of Egypt the ancient Nubians established a system of geometry including early versions of sun clocks.
In the 7th century BC, the Greek mathematician Thales of Miletus used geometry to solve problems such as calculating the height of pyramids and the distance of ships from the shore.
He is credited with the first use of deductive reasoning applied to geometry, by deriving four corollaries to Thales's theorem.
Pythagoras established the Pythagorean School, which is credited with the first proof of the Pythagorean theorem, though the statement of the theorem has a long history.
Around 300 BC, geometry was revolutionized by Euclid, whose Elements, widely considered the most successful and influential textbook of all time, introduced mathematical rigor through the axiomatic method and is the earliest example of the format still used in mathematics today, that of definition, axiom, theorem, and proof.
Although most of the contents of the Elements were already known, Euclid arranged them into a single, coherent logical framework.
The Elements was known to all educated people in the West until the middle of the 20th century and its contents are still taught in geometry classes today.
He also studied the spiral bearing his name and obtained formulas for the volumes of surfaces of revolution.
Indian mathematicians also made many important contributions in geometry.
The Shatapatha Brahmana (3rd century BC) contains rules for ritual geometric constructions that are similar to the Sulba Sutras.
According to (Hayashi 2005, p.
They contain lists of Pythagorean triples, which are particular cases of Diophantine equations.
In the Bakhshali manuscript, there are a handful of geometric problems (including problems about volumes of irregular solids).
The Bakhshali manuscript also "employs a decimal place value system with a dot for zero.
Brahmagupta wrote his astronomical work Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta in 628.
Chapter 12, containing 66 Sanskrit verses, was divided into two sections: "basic operations" (including cube roots, fractions, ratio and proportion, and barter) and "practical mathematics" (including mixture, mathematical series, plane figures, stacking bricks, sawing of timber, and piling of grain).
In the latter section, he stated his famous theorem on the diagonals of a cyclic quadrilateral.
Chapter 12 also included a formula for the area of a cyclic quadrilateral (a generalization of Heron's formula), as well as a complete description of rational triangles (i.
In the Middle Ages, mathematics in medieval Islam contributed to the development of geometry, especially algebraic geometry.
Thābit ibn Qurra (known as Thebit in Latin) (836–901) dealt with arithmetic operations applied to ratios of geometrical quantities, and contributed to the development of analytic geometry.
Omar Khayyam (1048–1131) found geometric solutions to cubic equations.
The theorems of Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen), Omar Khayyam and Nasir al-Din al-Tusi on quadrilaterals, including the Lambert quadrilateral and Saccheri quadrilateral, were part of a line of research on the parallel postulate continued by later European geometers, including Vitello (c.
In the early 17th century, there were two important developments in geometry.
The first was the creation of analytic geometry, or geometry with coordinates and equations, by René Descartes (1596–1650) and Pierre de Fermat (1601–1665).
This was a necessary precursor to the development of calculus and a precise quantitative science of physics.
The second geometric development of this period was the systematic study of projective geometry by Girard Desargues (1591–1661).
Projective geometry studies properties of shapes which are unchanged under projections and sections, especially as they relate to artistic perspective.
Two developments in geometry in the 19th century changed the way it had been studied previously.
These were the discovery of non-Euclidean geometries by Nikolai Ivanovich Lobachevsky, János Bolyai and Carl Friedrich Gauss and of the formulation of symmetry as the central consideration in the Erlangen programme of Felix Klein (which generalized the Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries).
Two of the master geometers of the time were Bernhard Riemann (1826–1866), working primarily with tools from mathematical analysis, and introducing the Riemann surface, and Henri Poincaré, the founder of algebraic topology and the geometric theory of dynamical systems.
As a consequence of these major changes in the conception of geometry, the concept of "space" became something rich and varied, and the natural background for theories as different as complex analysis and classical mechanics.
The following are some of the most important concepts in geometry.
Euclid took an abstract approach to geometry in his Elements, one of the most influential books ever written.
Euclid introduced certain axioms, or postulates, expressing primary or self-evident properties of points, lines, and planes.
He proceeded to rigorously deduce other properties by mathematical reasoning.
The characteristic feature of Euclid's approach to geometry was its rigor, and it has come to be known as axiomatic or synthetic geometry.
At the start of the 19th century, the discovery of non-Euclidean geometries by Nikolai Ivanovich Lobachevsky (1792–1856), János Bolyai (1802–1860), Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) and others led to a revival of interest in this discipline, and in the 20th century, David Hilbert (1862–1943) employed axiomatic reasoning in an attempt to provide a modern foundation of geometry.
Points are generally considered fundamental objects for building geometry.
They may be defined by the properties that they must have, as in Euclid's definition as "that which has no part", or in synthetic geometry.
In modern mathematics, they are generally defined as elements of a set called space, which is itself axiomatically defined.
With these modern definitions, every geometric shape is defined as a set of points; this is not the case in synthetic geometry, where a line is another fundamental object that is not viewed as the set of the points through which it passes.
However, there are modern geometries in which points are not primitive objects, or even without points.
One of the oldest such geometries is Whitehead's point-free geometry, formulated by Alfred North Whitehead in 1919–1920.
Euclid described a line as "breadthless length" which "lies equally with respect to the points on itself".
In modern mathematics, given the multitude of geometries, the concept of a line is closely tied to the way the geometry is described.
For instance, in analytic geometry, a line in the plane is often defined as the set of points whose coordinates satisfy a given linear equation, but in a more abstract setting, such as incidence geometry, a line may be an independent object, distinct from the set of points which lie on it.
In differential geometry, a geodesic is a generalization of the notion of a line to curved spaces.
In Euclidean geometry a plane is a flat, two-dimensional surface that extends infinitely; the definitions for other types of geometries are generalizations of that.
Planes are used in many areas of geometry.
For instance, planes can be studied as a topological surface without reference to distances or angles; it can be studied as an affine space, where collinearity and ratios can be studied but not distances; it can be studied as the complex plane using techniques of complex analysis; and so on.
A curve is a 1-dimensional object that may be straight (like a line) or not; curves in 2-dimensional space are called plane curves and those in 3-dimensional space are called space curves.
In topology, a curve is defined by a function from an interval of the real numbers to another space.
In differential geometry, the same definition is used, but the defining function is required to be differentiable.
Algebraic geometry studies algebraic curves, which are defined as algebraic varieties of dimension one.
A surface is a two-dimensional object, such as a sphere or paraboloid.
In differential geometry and topology, surfaces are described by two-dimensional 'patches' (or neighborhoods) that are assembled by diffeomorphisms or homeomorphisms, respectively.
In algebraic geometry, surfaces are described by polynomial equations.
A solid is a three-dimensional object bounded by a closed surface; for example, a ball is the volume bounded by a sphere.
A manifold is a generalization of the concepts of curve and surface.
In topology, a manifold is a topological space where every point has a neighborhood that is homeomorphic to Euclidean space.
In differential geometry, a differentiable manifold is a space where each neighborhood is diffeomorphic to Euclidean space.
Manifolds are used extensively in physics, including in general relativity and string theory.
Euclid defines a plane angle as the inclination to each other, in a plane, of two lines which meet each other, and do not lie straight with respect to each other.
In modern terms, an angle is the figure formed by two rays, called the sides of the angle, sharing a common endpoint, called the vertex of the angle.
The size of an angle is formalized as an angular measure.
In Euclidean geometry, angles are used to study polygons and triangles, as well as forming an object of study in their own right.
The study of the angles of a triangle or of angles in a unit circle forms the basis of trigonometry.
In differential geometry and calculus, the angles between plane curves or space curves or surfaces can be calculated using the derivative.
Length, area, and volume describe the size or extent of an object in one dimension, two dimension, and three dimensions respectively.
In Euclidean geometry and analytic geometry, the length of a line segment can often be calculated by the Pythagorean theorem.
Area and volume can be defined as fundamental quantities separate from length, or they can be described and calculated in terms of lengths in a plane or 3-dimensional space.
Mathematicians have found many explicit formulas for area and formulas for volume of various geometric objects.
In calculus, area and volume can be defined in terms of integrals, such as the Riemann integral or the Lebesgue integral.
Other geometrical measures include the curvature and compactness.
The concept of length or distance can be generalized, leading to the idea of metrics.
For instance, the Euclidean metric measures the distance between points in the Euclidean plane, while the hyperbolic metric measures the distance in the hyperbolic plane.
Other important examples of metrics include the Lorentz metric of special relativity and the semi-Riemannian metrics of general relativity.
In a different direction, the concepts of length, area and volume are extended by measure theory, which studies methods of assigning a size or measure to sets, where the measures follow rules similar to those of classical area and volume.
Congruence and similarity are concepts that describe when two shapes have similar characteristics.
In Euclidean geometry, similarity is used to describe objects that have the same shape, while congruence is used to describe objects that are the same in both size and shape.
Hilbert, in his work on creating a more rigorous foundation for geometry, treated congruence as an undefined term whose properties are defined by axioms.
Congruence and similarity are generalized in transformation geometry, which studies the properties of geometric objects that are preserved by different kinds of transformations.
Classical geometers paid special attention to constructing geometric objects that had been described in some other way.
Classically, the only instruments used in most geometric constructions are the compass and straightedge.
Also, every construction had to be complete in a finite number of steps.
However, some problems turned out to be difficult or impossible to solve by these means alone, and ingenious constructions using neusis, parabolas and other curves, or mechanical devices, were found.
The geometrical concepts of rotation and orientation define part of the placement of objects embedded in the plane or in space.
Traditional geometry allowed dimensions 1 (a line or curve), 2 (a plane or surface), and 3 (our ambient world conceived of as three-dimensional space).
Furthermore, mathematicians and physicists have used higher dimensions for nearly two centuries.
One example of a mathematical use for higher dimensions is the configuration space of a physical system, which has a dimension equal to the system's degrees of freedom.
For instance, the configuration of a screw can be described by five coordinates.
In general topology, the concept of dimension has been extended from natural numbers, to infinite dimension (Hilbert spaces, for example) and positive real numbers (in fractal geometry).
In algebraic geometry, the dimension of an algebraic variety has received a number of apparently different definitions, which are all equivalent in the most common cases.
The theme of symmetry in geometry is nearly as old as the science of geometry itself.
Symmetric shapes such as the circle, regular polygons and platonic solids held deep significance for many ancient philosophers and were investigated in detail before the time of Euclid.
Symmetric patterns occur in nature and were artistically rendered in a multitude of forms, including the graphics of Leonardo da Vinci, M.
In the second half of the 19th century, the relationship between symmetry and geometry came under intense scrutiny.
Felix Klein's Erlangen program proclaimed that, in a very precise sense, symmetry, expressed via the notion of a transformation group, determines what geometry is.
Symmetry in classical Euclidean geometry is represented by congruences and rigid motions, whereas in projective geometry an analogous role is played by collineations, geometric transformations that take straight lines into straight lines.
However it was in the new geometries of Bolyai and Lobachevsky, Riemann, Clifford and Klein, and Sophus Lie that Klein's idea to 'define a geometry via its symmetry group' found its inspiration.
Both discrete and continuous symmetries play prominent roles in geometry, the former in topology and geometric group theory, the latter in Lie theory and Riemannian geometry.
A different type of symmetry is the principle of duality in projective geometry, among other fields.
This meta-phenomenon can roughly be described as follows: in any theorem, exchange point with plane, join with meet, lies in with contains, and the result is an equally true theorem.
A similar and closely related form of duality exists between a vector space and its dual space.
Euclidean geometry is geometry in its classical sense.
As it models the space of the physical world, it is used in many scientific areas, such as mechanics, astronomy, crystallography, and many technical fields, such as engineering, architecture, geodesy, aerodynamics, and navigation.
The mandatory educational curriculum of the majority of nations includes the study of Euclidean concepts such as points, lines, planes, angles, triangles, congruence, similarity, solid figures, circles, and analytic geometry.
Euclidean vectors are used for a myriad of applications in physics and engineering, such as position, displacement, deformation, velocity, acceleration, force, etc.
Differential geometry uses techniques of calculus and linear algebra to study problems in geometry.
It has applications in physics, econometrics, and bioinformatics, among others.
In particular, differential geometry is of importance to mathematical physics due to Albert Einstein's general relativity postulation that the universe is curved.
Differential geometry can either be intrinsic (meaning that the spaces it considers are smooth manifolds whose geometric structure is governed by a Riemannian metric, which determines how distances are measured near each point) or extrinsic (where the object under study is a part of some ambient flat Euclidean space).
Non-Euclidean geometry consists of two geometries based on axioms closely related to those that specify Euclidean geometry.
As Euclidean geometry lies at the intersection of metric geometry and affine geometry, non-Euclidean geometry arises by either replacing the parallel postulate with an alternative, or consideration of quadratic forms other than the definite quadratic forms associated with metric geometry.
In the former case, one obtains hyperbolic geometry and elliptic geometry, the traditional non-Euclidean geometries.
When isotropic quadratic forms are admitted, then there are affine planes associated with the planar algebras, which give rise to kinematic geometries that have also been called non-Euclidean geometry.
Topology is the field concerned with the properties of continuous mappings, and can be considered a generalization of Euclidean geometry.
In practice, topology often means dealing with large-scale properties of spaces, such as connectedness and compactness.
The field of topology, which saw massive development in the 20th century, is in a technical sense a type of transformation geometry, in which transformations are homeomorphisms.
This has often been expressed in the form of the saying 'topology is rubber-sheet geometry'.
Subfields of topology include geometric topology, differential topology, algebraic topology and general topology.
Algebraic geometry is fundamentally the study by means of algebraic methods of some geometrical shapes, called algebraic sets, and defined as common zeros of multivariate polynomials.
Algebraic geometry became an autonomous subfield of geometry c.
This led to a parallel development of algebraic geometry, and its algebraic counterpart, called commutative algebra.
From the late 1950s through the mid-1970s algebraic geometry had undergone major foundational development, with the introduction by Alexander Grothendieck of scheme theory, which allows using topological methods, including cohomology theories in a purely algebraic context.
Scheme theory allowed to solve many difficult problems not only in geometry, but also in number theory.
Wiles' proof of Fermat's Last Theorem is a famous example of a long-standing problem of number theory whose solution uses scheme theory and its extensions such as stack theory.
One of seven Millennium Prize problems, the Hodge conjecture, is a question in algebraic geometry.
Algebraic geometry has applications in many areas, including cryptography and string theory.
Complex geometry studies the nature of geometric structures modelled on, or arising out of, the complex plane.
Complex geometry lies at the intersection of differential geometry, algebraic geometry, and analysis of several complex variables, and has found applications to string theory and mirror symmetry.
Complex geometry first appeared as a distinct area of study in the work of Bernhard Riemann in his study of Riemann surfaces.
Work in the spirit of Riemann was carried out by the Italian school of algebraic geometry in the early 1900s.
Contemporary treatment of complex geometry began with the work of Jean-Pierre Serre, who introduced the concept of sheaves to the subject, and illuminated the relations between complex geometry and algebraic geometry.
The primary objects of study in complex geometry are complex manifolds, complex algebraic varieties, and complex analytic varieties, and holomorphic vector bundles and coherent sheaves over these spaces.
Special examples of spaces studied in complex geometry include Riemann surfaces, and Calabi–Yau manifolds, and these spaces find uses in string theory.
In particular, worldsheets of strings are modelled by Riemann surfaces, and superstring theory predicts that the extra 6 dimensions of 10 dimensional spacetime may be modelled by Calabi–Yau manifolds.
Discrete geometry is a subject that has close connections with convex geometry.
It is concerned mainly with questions of relative position of simple geometric objects, such as points, lines and circles.
Examples include the study of sphere packings, triangulations, the Kneser-Poulsen conjecture, etc.
It shares many methods and principles with combinatorics.
Computational geometry deals with algorithms and their implementations for manipulating geometrical objects.
Important problems historically have included the travelling salesman problem, minimum spanning trees, hidden-line removal, and linear programming.
Although being a young area of geometry, it has many applications in computer vision, image processing, computer-aided design, medical imaging, etc.
Groups have been understood as geometric objects since Klein's Erlangen programme.
Geometric group theory studies group actions on objects that are regarded as geometric (significantly, isometric actions on metric spaces) to study finitely generated groups, often involving large-scale geometric techniques and borrowing from topology, geometry, dynamics and analysis.
It had a significant impact on low-dimensional topology, a celebrated result being Agol's proof of the virtually Haken conjecture that combines Perelman geometrization with cubulation techniques.
Group actions on their Cayley graphs are foundational examples of isometric group actions.
Other major topics include quasi-isometries, Gromov-hyperbolic groups and their generalizations (relatively and acylindrically hyperbolic groups), free groups and their automorphisms, groups acting on trees, various notions of nonpositive curvature for groups (CAT(0) groups, Dehn functions, automaticity.
Other group-theoretic topics like mapping class groups, property (T), solvability, amenability and lattices in Lie groups are sometimes regarded as strongly geometric as well.
Convex geometry investigates convex shapes in the Euclidean space and its more abstract analogues, often using techniques of real analysis and discrete mathematics.
It has close connections to convex analysis, optimization and functional analysis and important applications in number theory.
Convex geometry dates back to antiquity.
Archimedes gave the first known precise definition of convexity.
The isoperimetric problem, a recurring concept in convex geometry, was studied by the Greeks as well, including Zenodorus.
Archimedes, Plato, Euclid, and later Kepler and Coxeter all studied convex polytopes and their properties.
From the 19th century on, mathematicians have studied other areas of convex mathematics, including higher-dimensional polytopes, volume and surface area of convex bodies, Gaussian curvature, algorithms, tilings and lattices.
Geometry has found applications in many fields, some of which are described below.
Mathematics and art are related in a variety of ways.
For instance, the theory of perspective showed that there is more to geometry than just the metric properties of figures: perspective is the origin of projective geometry.
Artists have long used concepts of proportion in design.
Vitruvius developed a complicated theory of ideal proportions for the human figure.
These concepts have been used and adapted by artists from Michelangelo to modern comic book artists.
The golden ratio is a particular proportion that has had a controversial role in art.
Often claimed to be the most aesthetically pleasing ratio of lengths, it is frequently stated to be incorporated into famous works of art, though the most reliable and unambiguous examples were made deliberately by artists aware of this legend.
Tilings, or tessellations, have been used in art throughout history.
Islamic art makes frequent use of tessellations, as did the art of M.
Escher's work also made use of hyperbolic geometry.
Cézanne advanced the theory that all images can be built up from the sphere, the cone, and the cylinder.
This is still used in art theory today, although the exact list of shapes varies from author to author.
Geometry has many applications in architecture.
In fact, it has been said that geometry lies at the core of architectural design.
Applications of geometry to architecture include the use of projective geometry to create forced perspective, the use of conic sections in constructing domes and similar objects, the use of tessellations, and the use of symmetry.
The field of astronomy, especially as it relates to mapping the positions of stars and planets on the celestial sphere and describing the relationship between movements of celestial bodies, have served as an important source of geometric problems throughout history.
Riemannian geometry and pseudo-Riemannian geometry are used in general relativity.
String theory makes use of several variants of geometry, as does quantum information theory.
Calculus was strongly influenced by geometry.
For instance, the introduction of coordinates by René Descartes and the concurrent developments of algebra marked a new stage for geometry, since geometric figures such as plane curves could now be represented analytically in the form of functions and equations.
This played a key role in the emergence of infinitesimal calculus in the 17th century.
Analytic geometry continues to be a mainstay of pre-calculus and calculus curriculum.
Another important area of application is number theory.
In ancient Greece the Pythagoreans considered the role of numbers in geometry.
However, the discovery of incommensurable lengths contradicted their philosophical views.
Since the 19th century, geometry has been used for solving problems in number theory, for example through the geometry of numbers or, more recently, scheme theory, which is used in Wiles's proof of Fermat's Last Theorem.
Encyclopædia Britannica.
Algebra is a branch of mathematics that deals with abstract systems, known as algebraic structures, and the manipulation of expressions within those systems.
It is a generalization of arithmetic that introduces variables and algebraic operations other than the standard arithmetic operations, such as addition and multiplication.
Elementary algebra is the main form of algebra taught in schools.
It examines mathematical statements using variables for unspecified values and seeks to determine for which values the statements are true.
To do so, it uses different methods of transforming equations to isolate variables.
Linear algebra is a closely related field that investigates linear equations and combinations of them called systems of linear equations.
It provides methods to find the values that solve all equations in the system at the same time, and to study the set of these solutions.
Abstract algebra studies algebraic structures, which consist of a set of mathematical objects together with one or several operations defined on that set.
It is a generalization of elementary and linear algebra since it allows mathematical objects other than numbers and non-arithmetic operations.
It distinguishes between different types of algebraic structures, such as groups, rings, and fields, based on the number of operations they use and the laws they follow, called axioms.
Universal algebra and category theory provide general frameworks to investigate abstract patterns that characterize different classes of algebraic structures.
Algebraic methods were first studied in the ancient period to solve specific problems in fields like geometry.
This changed in the 9th century with Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī, who systematized algebra as an independent mathematical discipline, distinct from geometry.
Early mathematicians described equations and their solutions using words and abbreviations until the 16th and 17th centuries, when a rigorous symbolic formalism was developed.
In the mid-19th century, the scope of algebra broadened beyond a theory of equations to cover diverse types of algebraic operations and structures.
Algebra is relevant to many branches of mathematics, such as geometry, topology, number theory, and calculus, and other fields of inquiry, like logic and the empirical sciences.
Algebra is the branch of mathematics that studies algebraic structures and the operations they use.
An algebraic structure is a non-empty set of mathematical objects, such as the integers, together with algebraic operations defined on that set, like addition and multiplication.
Algebra explores the laws, general characteristics, and types of algebraic structures.
Within certain algebraic structures, it examines the use of variables in equations and how to manipulate these equations.
Algebra is often understood as a generalization of arithmetic.
Arithmetic studies operations like addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, in a particular domain of numbers, such as the real numbers.
Elementary algebra constitutes the first level of abstraction.
Like arithmetic, it restricts itself to specific types of numbers and operations.
It generalizes these operations by allowing indefinite quantities in the form of variables in addition to numbers.
A higher level of abstraction is found in abstract algebra, which is not limited to a particular domain and examines algebraic structures such as groups and rings.
It extends beyond typical arithmetic operations by also covering other types of operations.
Universal algebra is still more abstract in that it is not interested in specific algebraic structures but investigates the characteristics of algebraic structures in general.
The term algebra is sometimes used in a more narrow sense to refer only to elementary algebra or only to abstract algebra.
When used as a countable noun, an algebra is a specific type of algebraic structure that involves a vector space equipped with a certain type of binary operation, a bilinear map.
Depending on the context, "algebra" can also refer to other algebraic structures, like a Lie algebra or an associative algebra.
The word algebra comes from the Arabic term الجبر (al-jabr), which originally referred to the surgical treatment of bonesetting.
In the 9th century, the term received a mathematical meaning when Persian mathematician Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi employed it to name a method for transforming equations and used it in the title of his treatise al-Kitāb al-Mukhtaṣar fī Ḥisāb al-Jabr wal-Muqābalah [The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing] which was translated into Latin as Liber Algebrae et Almucabola.
The word entered the English language in the 16th century from Italian, Spanish, and medieval Latin.
Initially, its meaning was restricted to the theory of equations, that is, to the art of manipulating polynomial equations in view of solving them.
This changed in the 19th century when the scope of algebra broadened to cover the study of diverse types of algebraic operations and structures together with their underlying axioms, the laws they follow.
Elementary algebra, also called school algebra, college algebra, and classical algebra, is the oldest and most basic form of algebra.
It is a generalization of arithmetic that relies on variables and examines how mathematical statements may be transformed.
Arithmetic is the study of numerical operations and investigates how numbers are combined and transformed using the arithmetic operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, exponentiation, extraction of roots, and logarithm.
Elementary algebra relies on the same operations while allowing variables in addition to regular numbers.
Variables are symbols for unspecified or unknown quantities.
They make it possible to state relationships for which one does not know the exact values and to express general laws that are true, independent of which numbers are used.
Algebraic expressions are formed by using arithmetic operations to combine variables and numbers.
Some algebraic expressions take the form of statements that relate two expressions to one another.
An equation is a statement formed by comparing two expressions, saying that they are equal.
Inequations involve a different type of comparison, saying that the two sides are different.
Unlike other expressions, statements can be true or false, and their truth value usually depends on the values of the variables.
Equations with variables can be divided into identity equations and conditional equations.
Conditional equations are only true for some values.
The main goal of elementary algebra is to determine the values for which a statement is true.
This can be achieved by transforming and manipulating statements according to certain rules.
A key principle guiding this process is that whatever operation is applied to one side of an equation also needs to be done to the other side.
For example, if one subtracts 5 from the left side of an equation one also needs to subtract 5 from the right side to balance both sides.
The goal of these steps is usually to isolate the variable one is interested in on one side, a process known as solving the equation for that variable.
There are many other techniques used to solve equations.
Simplification is employed to replace a complicated expression with an equivalent simpler one.
For statements with several variables, substitution is a common technique to replace one variable with an equivalent expression that does not use this variable.
In a similar way, if one knows the value of one variable one may be able to use it to determine the value of other variables.
Algebraic equations can be interpreted geometrically to describe spatial figures in the form of a graph.
To do so, the different variables in the equation are understood as coordinates and the values that solve the equation are interpreted as points of a graph.
Each term is either a constant, a variable, or a product of a constant and variables.
Each variable can be raised to a positive integer power.
A monomial is a polynomial with one term while two- and three-term polynomials are called binomials and trinomials.
The degree of a polynomial is the maximal value (among its terms) of the sum of the exponents of the variables (4 in the above example).
Polynomials of degree one are called linear polynomials.
Linear algebra studies systems of linear polynomials.
A polynomial is said to be univariate or multivariate, depending on whether it uses one or more variables.
Factorization is a method used to simplify polynomials, making it easier to analyze them and determine the values for which they evaluate to zero.
Factorization consists of rewriting a polynomial as a product of several factors.
The polynomial as a whole is zero if and only if one of its factors is zero, i.
Before the 19th century, much of algebra was devoted to polynomial equations, that is equations obtained by equating a polynomial to zero.
The first attempts for solving polynomial equations were to express the solutions in terms of nth roots.
Solutions for the degrees 3 and 4 are given by the cubic and quartic formulas.
There are no general solutions for higher degrees, as proven in the 19th century by the Abel–Ruffini theorem.
Even when general solutions do not exist, approximate solutions can be found by numerical tools like the Newton–Raphson method.
The fundamental theorem of algebra asserts that every univariate polynomial equation of positive degree with real or complex coefficients has at least one complex solution.
Consequently, every polynomial of a positive degree can be factorized into linear polynomials.
This theorem was proved at the beginning of the 19th century, but this does not close the problem since the theorem does not provide any way for computing the solutions.
Linear algebra starts with the study of systems of linear equations.
A system of linear equations is a set of linear equations for which one is interested in common solutions.
Matrices are rectangular arrays of values that have been originally introduced for having a compact and synthetic notation for systems of linear equations.
Under some conditions on the number of rows and columns, matrices can be added, multiplied, and sometimes inverted.
All methods for solving linear systems may be expressed as matrix manipulations using these operations.
Methods of solving systems of linear equations range from the introductory, like substitution and elimination, to more advanced techniques using matrices, such as Cramer's rule, the Gaussian elimination, and LU decomposition.
Some systems of equations are inconsistent, meaning that no solutions exist because the equations contradict each other.
Consistent systems have either one unique solution or an infinite number of solutions.
The study of vector spaces and linear maps form a large part of linear algebra.
A vector space is an algebraic structure formed by a set with an addition that makes it an abelian group and a scalar multiplication that is compatible with addition (see vector space for details).
A linear map is a function between vector spaces that is compatible with addition and scalar multiplication.
In the case of finite-dimensional vector spaces, vectors and linear maps can be represented by matrices.
It follows that the theories of matrices and finite-dimensional vector spaces are essentially the same.
In particular, vector spaces provide a third way for expressing and manipulating systems of linear equations.
From this perspective, a matrix is a representation of a linear map: if one chooses a particular basis to describe the vectors being transformed, then the entries in the matrix give the results of applying the linear map to the basis vectors.
Systems of equations can be interpreted as geometric figures.
For systems with two variables, each equation represents a line in two-dimensional space.
The point where the two lines intersect is the solution of the full system because this is the only point that solves both the first and the second equation.
For inconsistent systems, the two lines run parallel, meaning that there is no solution since they never intersect.
If two equations are not independent then they describe the same line, meaning that every solution of one equation is also a solution of the other equation.
These relations make it possible to seek solutions graphically by plotting the equations and determining where they intersect.
The same principles also apply to systems of equations with more variables, with the difference being that the equations do not describe lines but higher dimensional figures.
For instance, equations with three variables correspond to planes in three-dimensional space, and the points where all planes intersect solve the system of equations.
Abstract algebra, also called modern algebra, is the study of algebraic structures.
An algebraic structure is a framework for understanding operations on mathematical objects, like the addition of numbers.
While elementary algebra and linear algebra work within the confines of particular algebraic structures, abstract algebra takes a more general approach that compares how algebraic structures differ from each other and what types of algebraic structures there are, such as groups, rings, and fields.
The key difference between these types of algebraic structures lies in the number of operations they use and the laws they obey.
In mathematics education, abstract algebra refers to an advanced undergraduate course that mathematics majors take after completing courses in linear algebra.
On a formal level, an algebraic structure is a set of mathematical objects, called the underlying set, together with one or several operations.
Abstract algebra is primarily interested in binary operations, which take any two objects from the underlying set as inputs and maps them to another object from this set as output.
The underlying set can contain mathematical objects other than numbers, and the operations are not restricted to regular arithmetic operations.
For instance, the underlying set of the symmetry group of a geometric object is made up of geometric transformations, such as rotations, under which the object remains unchanged.
Its binary operation is function composition, which takes two transformations as input and has the transformation resulting from applying the first transformation followed by the second as its output.
Abstract algebra classifies algebraic structures based on the laws or axioms that its operations obey and the number of operations it uses.
One of the most basic types is a group, which has one operation and requires that this operation is associative and has an identity element and inverse elements.
An operation is associative if the order of several applications does not matter, i.
An operation has an identity element or a neutral element if one element e exists that does not change the value of any other element, i.
Every algebraic structure that fulfills these requirements is a group.
The natural numbers with addition, by contrast, do not form a group since they contain only positive integers and therefore lack inverse elements.
Group theory examines the nature of groups, with basic theorems such as the fundamental theorem of finite abelian groups and the Feit–Thompson theorem.
The latter was a key early step in one of the most important mathematical achievements of the 20th century: the collaborative effort, taking up more than 10,000 journal pages and mostly published between 1960 and 2004, that culminated in a complete classification of finite simple groups.
A ring is an algebraic structure with two operations that work similarly to the addition and multiplication of numbers and are named and generally denoted similarly.
A ring is a commutative group under addition: the addition of the ring is associative, commutative, and has an identity element and inverse elements.
Moreover, multiplication is associative and has an identity element generally denoted as 1.
Multiplication needs not to be commutative; if it is commutative, one has a commutative ring.
The ring of integers does not form a field because it lacks multiplicative inverses.
The rational numbers, the real numbers, and the complex numbers each form a field with the operations of addition and multiplication.
Ring theory is the study of rings, exploring concepts such as subrings, quotient rings, polynomial rings, and ideals as well as theorems such as Hilbert's basis theorem.
Field theory is concerned with fields, examining field extensions, algebraic closures, and finite fields.
Galois theory explores the relation between field theory and group theory, relying on the fundamental theorem of Galois theory.
Besides groups, rings, and fields, there are many other algebraic structures studied by algebra.
They include magmas, semigroups, monoids, abelian groups, commutative rings, modules, lattices, vector spaces, algebras over a field, and associative and non-associative algebras.
They differ from each other regarding the types of objects they describe and the requirements that their operations fulfill.
Many are related to each other in that a basic structure can be turned into a more specialized structure by adding constraints.
For example, a magma becomes a semigroup if its operation is associative.
Homomorphisms are tools to examine structural features by comparing two algebraic structures.
A homomorphism is a function from the underlying set of one algebraic structure to the underlying set of another algebraic structure that preserves certain structural characteristics.
Isomorphisms are a special type of homomorphism that indicates a high degree of similarity between two algebraic structures.
An isomorphism is a bijective homomorphism, meaning that it establishes a one-to-one relationship between the elements of the two algebraic structures.
This implies that every element of the first algebraic structure is mapped to one unique element in the second structure without any unmapped elements in the second structure.
Another tool of comparison is the relation between an algebraic structure and its subalgebra.
The algebraic structure and its subalgebra use the same operations, which follow the same axioms.
The only difference is that the underlying set of the subalgebra is a subset of the underlying set of the algebraic structure.
All operations in the subalgebra are required to be closed in its underlying set, meaning that they only produce elements that belong to this set.
For example, the set of even integers together with addition is a subalgebra of the full set of integers together with addition.
This is the case because the sum of two even numbers is again an even number.
But the set of odd integers together with addition is not a subalgebra because it is not closed: adding two odd numbers produces an even number, which is not part of the chosen subset.
Universal algebra is the study of algebraic structures in general.
As part of its general perspective, it is not concerned with the specific elements that make up the underlying sets and considers operations with more than two inputs, such as ternary operations.
It provides a framework for investigating what structural features different algebraic structures have in common.
One of those structural features concerns the identities that are true in different algebraic structures.
In this context, an identity is a universal equation or an equation that is true for all elements of the underlying set.
A variety is a class of all algebraic structures that satisfy certain identities.
For example, if two algebraic structures satisfy commutativity then they are both part of the corresponding variety.
Category theory examines how mathematical objects are related to each other using the concept of categories.
A category is a collection of objects together with a collection of morphisms or "arrows" between those objects.
These two collections must satisfy certain conditions.
Composition of morphisms is required to be associative, and there must be an "identity morphism" for every object.
Categories are widely used in contemporary mathematics since they provide a unifying framework to describe and analyze many fundamental mathematical concepts.
For example, sets can be described with the category of sets, and any group can be regarded as the morphisms of a category with just one object.
The origin of algebra lies in attempts to solve mathematical problems involving arithmetic calculations and unknown quantities.
These developments happened in the ancient period in Babylonia, Egypt, Greece, China, and India.
One of the earliest documents on algebraic problems is the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus from ancient Egypt, which was written around 1650 BCE.
It discusses solutions to linear equations, as expressed in problems like "A quantity; its fourth is added to it.
What is the quantity?
Many of these insights found their way to the ancient Greeks.
Starting in the 6th century BCE, their main interest was geometry rather than algebra, but they employed algebraic methods to solve geometric problems.
For example, they studied geometric figures while taking their lengths and areas as unknown quantities to be determined, as exemplified in Pythagoras' formulation of the difference of two squares method and later in Euclid's Elements.
In the 3rd century CE, Diophantus provided a detailed treatment of how to solve algebraic equations in a series of books called Arithmetica.
He was the first to experiment with symbolic notation to express polynomials.
Diophantus's work influenced Arab development of algebra, with many of his methods reflected in the concepts and techniques used in medieval Arabic algebra.
In ancient China, The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art, a book composed over the period spanning from the 10th century BCE to the 2nd century CE, explored various techniques for solving algebraic equations, including the use of matrix-like constructs.
It is disputed whether these early developments are part of algebra or only precursors.
They offered solutions to algebraic problems but did not conceive them in an abstract and general manner, focusing instead on specific cases and applications.
This changed with the Persian mathematician Al-Khwarizmi, who published his The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing in 825 CE.
Al-Khwarizmi provided the first analytical theory for solving equations by classifying them into six standard forms and offering systematic, step-by-step procedures for their solutions.
By abstracting these methods from specific geometric figures and treating unknown quantities as general algebraic objects, he established a formal operational framework.
This transition from solving isolated problems to developing a universal methodology transformed algebra into a self-contained discipline.
Other influential contributions to algebra came from the Arab mathematician Thābit ibn Qurra also in the 9th century and the Persian mathematician Omar Khayyam in the 11th and 12th centuries.
In India, Brahmagupta investigated how to solve quadratic equations and systems of equations with several variables in the 7th century CE.
Among his innovations were the use of zero and negative numbers in algebraic equations.
The Indian mathematicians Mahāvīra in the 9th century and Bhāskara II in the 12th century further refined Brahmagupta's methods and concepts.
In 1247, the Chinese mathematician Qin Jiushao wrote the Mathematical Treatise in Nine Sections, which includes an algorithm for the numerical evaluation of polynomials, including polynomials of higher degrees.
The Italian mathematician Fibonacci brought al-Khwarizmi's ideas and techniques to Europe in books including his Liber Abaci.
In 1545, the Italian polymath Gerolamo Cardano published his book Ars Magna, which covered many topics in algebra, discussed imaginary numbers, and was the first to present general methods for solving cubic and quartic equations.
In the 16th and 17th centuries, the French mathematicians François Viète and René Descartes introduced letters and symbols to denote variables and operations, making it possible to express equations in a concise and abstract manner.
Their predecessors had relied on verbal descriptions of problems and solutions.
Some historians see this development as a key turning point in the history of algebra and consider what came before it as the prehistory of algebra because it lacked the abstract nature based on symbolic manipulation.
In the 17th and 18th centuries, many attempts were made to find general solutions to polynomials of degree five and higher.
At the end of the 18th century, the German mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss proved the fundamental theorem of algebra, which describes the existence of zeros of polynomials of any degree without providing a general solution.
At the beginning of the 19th century, the Italian mathematician Paolo Ruffini and the Norwegian mathematician Niels Henrik Abel were able to show that no general solution exists for polynomials of degree five and higher.
In response to and shortly after their findings, the French mathematician Évariste Galois developed what came later to be known as Galois theory, which offered a more in-depth analysis of the solutions of polynomials while also laying the foundation of group theory.
Mathematicians soon realized the relevance of group theory to other fields and applied it to disciplines like geometry and number theory.
Starting in the mid-19th century, interest in algebra shifted from the study of polynomials associated with elementary algebra towards a more general inquiry into algebraic structures, marking the emergence of abstract algebra.
This approach explored the axiomatic basis of arbitrary algebraic operations.
The invention of new algebraic systems based on different operations and elements accompanied this development, such as Boolean algebra, vector algebra, and matrix algebra.
Influential early developments in abstract algebra were made by the German mathematicians David Hilbert, Ernst Steinitz, and Emmy Noether as well as the Austrian mathematician Emil Artin.
They researched different forms of algebraic structures and categorized them based on their underlying axioms into types, like groups, rings, and fields.
The idea of the even more general approach associated with universal algebra was conceived by the English mathematician Alfred North Whitehead in his 1898 book A Treatise on Universal Algebra.
Starting in the 1930s, the American mathematician Garrett Birkhoff expanded these ideas and developed many of the foundational concepts of this field.
The invention of universal algebra led to the emergence of various new areas focused on the algebraization of mathematics—that is, the application of algebraic methods to other branches of mathematics.
Topological algebra arose in the early 20th century, studying algebraic structures such as topological groups and Lie groups.
In the 1940s and 50s, homological algebra emerged, employing algebraic techniques to study homology.
Around the same time, category theory was developed and has since played a key role in the foundations of mathematics.
Other developments were the formulation of model theory and the study of free algebras.
The influence of algebra is wide-reaching, both within mathematics and in its applications to other fields.
The algebraization of mathematics is the process of applying algebraic methods and principles to other branches of mathematics, such as geometry, topology, number theory, and calculus.
It happens by employing symbols in the form of variables to express mathematical insights on a more general level, allowing mathematicians to develop formal models describing how objects interact and relate to each other.
One application, found in geometry, is the use of algebraic statements to describe geometric figures.
Of special interest to algebraic geometry are algebraic varieties, which are solutions to systems of polynomial equations that can be used to describe more complex geometric figures.
Algebraic reasoning can also solve geometric problems.
Topology studies the properties of geometric figures or topological spaces that are preserved under operations of continuous deformation.
Algebraic topology relies on algebraic theories such as group theory to classify topological spaces.
For example, homotopy groups classify topological spaces based on the existence of loops or holes in them.
Number theory is concerned with the properties of and relations between integers.
Algebraic number theory applies algebraic methods and principles to this field of inquiry.
Examples are the use of algebraic expressions to describe general laws, like Fermat's Last Theorem, and of algebraic structures to analyze the behavior of numbers, such as the ring of integers.
The related field of combinatorics uses algebraic techniques to solve problems related to counting, arrangement, and combination of discrete objects.
An example in algebraic combinatorics is the application of group theory to analyze graphs and symmetries.
The insights of algebra are also relevant to calculus, which uses mathematical expressions to examine rates of change and accumulation.
It relies on algebra, for instance, to understand how these expressions can be transformed and what role variables play in them.
Algebraic logic employs the methods of algebra to describe and analyze the structures and patterns that underlie logical reasoning, exploring both the relevant mathematical structures themselves and their application to concrete problems of logic.
It includes the study of Boolean algebra to describe propositional logic as well as the formulation and analysis of algebraic structures corresponding to more complex systems of logic.
Algebraic methods are also commonly employed in other areas, like the natural sciences.
For example, they are used to express scientific laws and solve equations in physics, chemistry, and biology.
Similar applications are found in fields like economics, geography, engineering (including electronics and robotics), and computer science to express relationships, solve problems, and model systems.
Linear algebra plays a central role in artificial intelligence and machine learning, for instance, by enabling the efficient processing and analysis of large datasets.
Various fields rely on algebraic structures investigated by abstract algebra.
For example, physical sciences like crystallography and quantum mechanics make extensive use of group theory, which is also employed to study puzzles such as Sudoku and Rubik's Cubes, and origami.
Both coding theory and cryptology rely on abstract algebra to solve problems associated with data transmission, like avoiding the effects of noise and ensuring data security.
Algebra education mostly focuses on elementary algebra, which is one of the reasons why elementary algebra is also called school algebra.
It is usually not introduced until secondary education since it requires mastery of the fundamentals of arithmetic while posing new cognitive challenges associated with abstract reasoning and generalization.
It aims to familiarize students with the formal side of mathematics by helping them understand mathematical symbolism, for example, how variables can be used to represent unknown quantities.
An additional difficulty for students lies in the fact that, unlike arithmetic calculations, algebraic expressions are often difficult to solve directly.
Instead, students need to learn how to transform them according to certain laws, often to determine an unknown quantity.
Some tools to introduce students to the abstract side of algebra rely on concrete models and visualizations of equations, including geometric analogies, manipulatives including sticks or cups, and "function machines" representing equations as flow diagrams.
One method uses balance scales as a pictorial approach to help students grasp basic problems of algebra.
The mass of some objects on the scale is unknown and represents variables.
Solving an equation corresponds to adding and removing objects on both sides in such a way that the sides stay in balance until the only object remaining on one side is the object of unknown mass.
Word problems are another tool to show how algebra is applied to real-life situations.
For example, students may be presented with a situation in which Naomi's brother has twice as many apples as Naomi.
At the university level, mathematics students encounter advanced algebra topics from linear and abstract algebra.
Initial undergraduate courses in linear algebra focus on matrices, vector spaces, and linear maps.
Upon completing them, students are usually introduced to abstract algebra, where they learn about algebraic structures like groups, rings, and fields, as well as the relations between them.
The curriculum typically also covers specific instances of algebraic structures, such as the systems of rational numbers, the real numbers, and the polynomials.
Calculus is the mathematical study of continuous change, and the principal precursor of modern mathematical analysis.
Originally called infinitesimal calculus or the calculus of infinitesimals, it has two major branches, differential calculus and integral calculus.
Differential calculus studies instantaneous rates of change and slopes of curves; integral calculus studies accumulation of quantities and areas under or between curves.
These two branches are related to each other by the fundamental theorem of calculus.
Calculus uses convergence of infinite sequences and infinite series to a well-defined mathematical limit.
Calculus is the "mathematical backbone" for solving problems in which variable quantities change with time or another reference value.
It has also been called "the basic instrument of physical science".
In the late 17th century, Isaac Newton and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz each independently formulated infinitesimal calculus.
Later work, including the formalization of the concept of limits, put calculus on a more solid conceptual footing.
The concepts and techniques of calculus have broad applications in science, engineering, and other branches of mathematics.
In Latin, the word calculus means "pebble" – a meaning which still persists in medicine.
Because pebbles were used as counters in Roman counting-board abacuses, Romans called their reckoning "placing pebbles" (calculos ponere), and would settle accounts by "calling someone to the pebbles" (vocare aliquem ad calculos); the Latin word calculare appeared around 400 AD in Spain.
The word calculate was used in English in this sense at least as early as 1672, several years before the publications of Leibniz and Newton, who wrote their mathematical texts in Latin.
In addition to differential calculus and integral calculus, the term is also used for naming specific methods of computation or theories that imply some sort of computation.
Examples of this usage include propositional calculus, Ricci calculus, calculus of variations, lambda calculus, sequent calculus, and process calculus.
Furthermore, the term calculus has variously been applied in ethics and philosophy, for such systems as Bentham's felicific calculus, and the ethical calculus.
Calculus provides a generalization of concepts from elementary geometry and algebra.
For example, instead of describing the slope of a straight line, calculus can describe the changing slope of a complicated curve.
Elementary geometry provides formulas for the area of shapes like triangles, squares, and other polygons, whereas calculus provides a way to find the area of a shape whose boundary is described by a complicated formula.
In elementary algebra, one can calculate the distance traveled over time by an object moving at a constant velocity, while in calculus, one can calculate the distance that an object travels even when the velocity varies.
Calculus is usually developed by working with very small quantities.
Historically, the first method of doing so was by infinitesimals.
These are objects which can be treated like real numbers but which are, in some sense, "infinitely small".
For example, an infinitesimal number could be greater than 0, but less than any number in the sequence 1, 1/2, 1/3, .
From this point of view, calculus is a collection of techniques for manipulating infinitesimals.
The infinitesimal approach fell out of favor in the 19th century because it was difficult to make the notion of an infinitesimal precise.
In the late 19th century, infinitesimals were replaced within academia by the epsilon, delta approach to limits.
Limits describe the behavior of a function at a certain input in terms of its values at nearby inputs.
They capture small-scale behavior using the intrinsic structure of the real number system.
In this treatment, calculus is a collection of techniques for manipulating certain limits.
Infinitesimals get replaced by sequences of smaller and smaller numbers, and the infinitely small behavior of a function is found by taking the limiting behavior for these sequences.
Limits were thought to provide a more rigorous foundation for calculus, and for this reason, they became the standard approach during the 20th century.
However, the infinitesimal concept was revived in the 20th century with the introduction of non-standard analysis and smooth infinitesimal analysis, which provided solid foundations for the manipulation of infinitesimals.
Differential calculus is the study of the definition, properties, and applications of the derivative of a function.
The process of finding the derivative is called differentiation.
Given a function and a point in the domain, the derivative at that point is a way of encoding the small-scale behavior of the function near that point.
By finding the derivative of a function at every point in its domain, it is possible to produce a new function, called the derivative function or just the derivative of the original function.
Geometrically speaking, the derivative generalizes the idea of the slope of a line: it gives a way to quantify the steepness of the graph of a function, even when that graph is not a straight line.
In Lagrange's notation, the symbol for a derivative is an apostrophe-like mark called a prime.
Thus, the derivative of a function called f is denoted by f′, pronounced "f prime" or "f dash".
For instance, if f(x) = x2 is the squaring function, then f′(x) = 2x is its derivative.
This gives an exact value for the slope of a straight line.
If the graph of the function is not a straight line, however, then the change in y divided by the change in x varies.
Derivatives give an exact meaning to the notion of change in output concerning change in input.
To be concrete, let f be a function, and fix a point a in the domain of f.
If h is a number close to zero, then a + h is a number close to a.
Therefore, (a + h, f(a + h)) is close to (a, f(a)).
This expression is called a difference quotient.
A line through two points on a curve is called a secant line, so m is the slope of the secant line between (a, f(a)) and (a + h, f(a + h)).
The secant line is only an approximation to the behavior of the function at the point a because it does not account for what happens between a and a + h.
It is not possible to discover the behavior at a by setting h to zero because this would require dividing by zero, which is undefined.
Geometrically, the derivative is the slope of the tangent line to the graph of f at a.
The tangent line is a limit of secant lines just as the derivative is a limit of difference quotients.
If the input of the function represents time, then the derivative represents change concerning time.
For example, if f is a function that takes time as input and gives the position of a ball at that time as output, then the derivative of f is how the position is changing in time, that is, it is the velocity of the ball.
In an approach based on limits, the symbol ⁠dy/ dx⁠ is to be interpreted not as the quotient of two numbers but as a shorthand for the limit computed above.
Leibniz, however, did intend it to represent the quotient of two infinitesimally small numbers, dy being the infinitesimally small change in y caused by an infinitesimally small change dx applied to x.
We can also think of ⁠d/ dx⁠ as a differentiation operator, which takes a function as an input and gives another function, the derivative, as the output.
In this usage, the dx in the denominator is read as "with respect to x".
Integral calculus is the study of the definitions, properties, and applications of two related concepts, the indefinite integral and the definite integral.
The process of finding the value of an integral is called integration.
The indefinite integral, also known as the antiderivative, is the inverse operation to the derivative.
F is an indefinite integral of f when f is a derivative of F.
The technical definition of the definite integral involves the limit of a sum of areas of rectangles, called a Riemann sum.
A motivating example is the distance traveled in a given time.
But if the speed changes, a more powerful method of finding the distance is necessary.
One such method is to approximate the distance traveled by breaking up the time into many short intervals of time, then multiplying the time elapsed in each interval by one of the speeds in that interval, and then taking the sum (a Riemann sum) of the approximate distance traveled in each interval.
The basic idea is that if only a short time elapses, then the speed will stay more or less the same.
However, a Riemann sum only gives an approximation of the distance traveled.
We must take the limit of all such Riemann sums to find the exact distance traveled.
When velocity is constant, the total distance traveled over the given time interval can be computed by multiplying velocity and time.
For example, traveling a steady 50 mph for 3 hours results in a total distance of 150 miles.
Plotting the velocity as a function of time yields a rectangle with a height equal to the velocity and a width equal to the time elapsed.
Therefore, the product of velocity and time also calculates the rectangular area under the (constant) velocity curve.
This connection between the area under a curve and the distance traveled can be extended to any irregularly shaped region exhibiting a fluctuating velocity over a given period.
If f(x) represents speed as it varies over time, the distance traveled between the times represented by a and b is the area of the region between f(x) and the x-axis, between x = a and x = b.
To approximate that area, an intuitive method would be to divide up the distance between a and b into several equal segments, the length of each segment represented by the symbol Δx.
For each small segment, we can choose one value of the function f(x).
Then the area of the rectangle with base Δx and height h gives the distance (time Δx multiplied by speed h) traveled in that segment.
Associated with each segment is the average value of the function above it, f(x) = h.
The sum of all such rectangles gives an approximation of the area between the axis and the curve, which is an approximation of the total distance traveled.
A smaller value for Δx will give more rectangles and in most cases a better approximation, but for an exact answer, we need to take a limit as Δx approaches zero.
Functions differing by only a constant have the same derivative, and it can be shown that the antiderivative of a given function is a family of functions differing only by a constant.
The unspecified constant C present in the indefinite integral or antiderivative is known as the constant of integration.
The fundamental theorem of calculus states that differentiation and integration are inverse operations.
More precisely, it relates the values of antiderivatives to definite integrals.
Because it is usually easier to compute an antiderivative than to apply the definition of a definite integral, the fundamental theorem of calculus provides a practical way of computing definite integrals.
It can also be interpreted as a precise statement of the fact that differentiation is the inverse of integration.
This realization, made by both Newton and Leibniz, was key to the proliferation of analytic results after their work became known.
It is also a prototype solution of a differential equation.
Differential equations relate an unknown function to its derivatives and are ubiquitous in the sciences.
Multivariable calculus is the extension of calculus in one variable to functions of several variables: the differentiation and integration of functions involving multiple variables (multivariate), rather than just one.
It is used extensively in physics and engineering, especially in the description of electromagnetic fields, gravitational fields, and fluid flow.
A differential equation is an equation that relates one or more unknown functions and their derivatives.
In applications, the functions generally represent physical quantities, the derivatives represent their rates of change, and the differential equation defines a relationship between the two.
Such relations are common in mathematical models and scientific laws; therefore, differential equations play a prominent role in many disciplines including engineering, physics, economics, and biology.
This differential equation describes exponential decay.
The study of differential equations consists mainly of the study of their solutions (the set of functions that satisfy each equation), and of the properties of their solutions.
Only the simplest differential equations are solvable by explicit formulas; however, many properties of solutions of a given differential equation may be determined without computing them exactly, and differential equations that cannot be solved exactly are often amenable to numerical approximations.
Real analysis provides the rigorous underpinnings of calculus, establishing that ideas often introduced heuristically in introductory calculus have a solid foundation.
It studies the behavior of real numbers, sequences and series of real numbers, and real functions.
Some particular properties of real-valued sequences and functions that real analysis studies include convergence, limits, continuity, smoothness, differentiability, and integrability.
Complex analysis investigates functions of a complex variable.
It is helpful in many branches of mathematics, including real analysis, algebraic geometry, number theory, analytic combinatorics, and applied mathematics, as well as in physics, including the branches of hydrodynamics, thermodynamics, quantum mechanics, and twistor theory.
By extension, use of complex analysis also has applications in engineering fields such as nuclear, aerospace, mechanical and electrical engineering.
Complex analysis studies holomorphic functions, the differentiable functions of a complex variable.
By contrast with the real case, a holomorphic function is always infinitely differentiable and equal to the sum of its Taylor series in some neighborhood of each point of its domain.
This makes methods and results of complex analysis significantly different from those of real analysis.
The calculus of variations (or variational calculus) studies functionals in analogy to how elementary calculus studies functions.
Whereas elementary calculus considers infinitesimally small changes in the input and output values of functions, the calculus of variations considers infinitesimally small changes in functions themselves.
A functional is a mapping from a set of functions to the real numbers.
The calculus of variations studies how the output of a functional changes as the input function is infinitesimally perturbed.
A simple example of such a problem is to find the curve of shortest length connecting two points.
If there are no constraints, the solution is a straight line between the points.
However, if the curve is constrained to lie on a surface in space, then the solution is less obvious, and possibly many solutions may exist.
Such solutions are known as geodesics.
A related problem is posed by Fermat's principle: light follows the path of shortest optical length connecting two points, which depends upon the material of the medium.
One corresponding concept in mechanics is the principle of least/stationary action.
Functionals are often expressed as definite integrals involving functions and their derivatives.
Functions that maximize or minimize functionals may be found using the Euler–Lagrange equation of the calculus of variations.
Modern calculus was developed in 17th-century Europe by Isaac Newton and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (independently of each other, first publishing around the same time).
Elements of it first appeared in ancient Egypt and later Greece, then in China and the Middle East, and still later again in medieval Europe and India.
Calculations of volume and area, one goal of integral calculus, can be found in the Egyptian Moscow papyrus (c.
Babylonians may have discovered the trapezoidal rule while doing astronomical observations of Jupiter.
Laying the foundations for integral calculus and foreshadowing the concept of the limit, ancient Greek mathematician Eudoxus of Cnidus (c.
During the Hellenistic period, this method was further developed by Archimedes (c.
In The Method of Mechanical Theorems he describes, for example, calculating the center of gravity of a solid hemisphere, the center of gravity of a frustum of a circular paraboloid, and the area of a region bounded by a parabola and one of its secant lines.
The method of exhaustion was later discovered independently in China by Liu Hui in the 3rd century AD to find the area of a circle.
In the 5th century AD, Zu Gengzhi, son of Zu Chongzhi, established a method that would later be called Cavalieri's principle to find the volume of a sphere.
In the Middle East, Hasan Ibn al-Haytham, Latinized as Alhazen (c.
He used the results to carry out what would now be called an integration of this function, where the formulae for the sums of integral squares and fourth powers allowed him to calculate the volume of a paraboloid.
In the 14th century, Indian mathematicians gave a non-rigorous method, resembling differentiation, applicable to some trigonometric functions.
Madhava of Sangamagrama and the Kerala School of Astronomy and Mathematics stated components of calculus.
According to Victor J.
Katz, they, however, were not able to "combine many differing ideas under the two unifying themes of the derivative and the integral, show the connection between the two, and turn calculus into the great problem-solving tool we have today.
The mathematical study of continuity was revived in the 14th century by the Oxford Calculators and French collaborators such as Nicole Oresme, who proved the divergence of the harmonic series; both are also credited with formulating the mean speed theorem.
Johannes Kepler's work Stereometria Doliorum (1615) formed the basis of integral calculus.
Kepler developed a method to calculate the area of an ellipse by adding up the lengths of many radii drawn from a focus of the ellipse.
Bonaventura Cavalieri, basing his work on Kepler's, argued that volumes and areas should be computed as the sums of the volumes and areas of infinitesimally thin cross-sections.
The formal study of calculus brought together Cavalieri's infinitesimals with the calculus of finite differences developed in Europe at around the same time.
Pierre de Fermat, claiming that he borrowed from Diophantus, introduced the concept of adequality, which represented equality up to an infinitesimal error term.
The combination was achieved by John Wallis, Isaac Barrow, and James Gregory, the latter two proving part of the fundamental theorem of calculus around 1670.
The product rule and chain rule, the notions of higher derivatives and Taylor series, and of analytic functions were used by Isaac Newton in an idiosyncratic notation which he applied to solve problems of mathematical physics.
In his works, Newton rephrased his ideas to suit the mathematical idiom of the time, replacing calculations with infinitesimals by equivalent geometrical arguments that were considered beyond reproach.
He used the methods of calculus to solve the problem of planetary motion, the shape of the surface of a rotating fluid, the oblateness of the earth, the motion of a weight sliding on a cycloid, and many other problems discussed in his Principia Mathematica (1687).
In other work, he developed series expansions for functions, including fractional and irrational powers, and it was clear that he understood the principles of the Taylor series.
He did not publish all these discoveries, and at this time, infinitesimal methods were still considered disreputable.
These ideas were arranged into a true calculus of infinitesimals by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, who was originally accused of plagiarism by Newton.
He is now regarded as an independent inventor of and contributor to calculus.
His contribution was to provide a clear set of rules for working with infinitesimal quantities, allowing the computation of second and higher derivatives, and providing the product rule and chain rule, in their differential and integral forms.
Unlike Newton, Leibniz put painstaking effort into his choices of notation.
Today, Newton and Leibniz are usually both given credit for independently inventing and developing calculus.
Newton was the first to apply calculus to general physics.
Leibniz developed much of the notation used in calculus today.
The basic insights that both Newton and Leibniz provided led to their development of the laws of differentiation and integration, their emphasis that differentiation and integration are inverse processes, their development of methods for calculating the second and higher derivatives, and their statement of the notion for approximating a polynomial series.
When Newton and Leibniz first published their results, there was great controversy over which mathematician (and therefore which country) deserved credit.
Newton derived his results first in 1665-1666 (later to be published in his Method of Fluxions), but Leibniz published his "Nova Methodus pro Maximis et Minimis" first in 1684.
Newton claimed Leibniz stole ideas from his unpublished notes, which Newton had shared with a few members of the Royal Society.
This controversy divided English-speaking mathematicians from continental European mathematicians for many years, to the detriment of English mathematics.
A careful examination of the papers of Leibniz and Newton shows that they arrived at their results independently, with Leibniz starting first with integration and Newton with differentiation.
It is Leibniz, however, who gave the new discipline its name.
Newton called his calculus "the science of fluxions", a term that endured in English schools into the 19th century.
The first complete treatise on calculus to be written in English and use the Leibniz notation was not published until 1815.
Since the time of Newton and Leibniz, many mathematicians have contributed to the continuing development of calculus.
One of the first and most complete works on both infinitesimal and integral calculus was written in 1748 by Maria Gaetana Agnesi.
In calculus, foundations refers to the rigorous development of the subject from axioms and definitions.
In early calculus, the use of infinitesimal quantities was thought unrigorous and was fiercely criticized by several authors, most notably Michel Rolle and Bishop Berkeley.
Berkeley famously described infinitesimals as the ghosts of departed quantities in his book The Analyst in 1734.
Working out a rigorous foundation for calculus occupied mathematicians for much of the century following Newton and Leibniz.
Several mathematicians, including Maclaurin, tried to prove the soundness of using infinitesimals, but it would not be until 150 years later when, due to the work of Cauchy and Weierstrass, a way was finally found to avoid mere "notions" of infinitely small quantities.
The foundations of differential and integral calculus had been laid.
In Cauchy's Cours d'Analyse, we find a broad range of foundational approaches, including a definition of continuity in terms of infinitesimals, and a (somewhat imprecise) prototype of an (ε, δ)-definition of limit in the definition of differentiation.
In his work, Weierstrass formalized the concept of limit and eliminated infinitesimals (although his definition can validate nilsquare infinitesimals).
Following the work of Weierstrass, it eventually became common to base calculus on limits instead of infinitesimal quantities, though the subject is still occasionally called "infinitesimal calculus".
Bernhard Riemann used these ideas to give a precise definition of the integral.
It was also during this period that the ideas of calculus were generalized to the complex plane with the development of complex analysis.
In modern mathematics, the foundations of calculus are included in the field of real analysis, which contains full definitions and proofs of the theorems of calculus.
The reach of calculus has also been greatly extended.
Henri Lebesgue invented measure theory, based on earlier developments by Émile Borel, and used it to define integrals of all but the most pathological functions.
Laurent Schwartz introduced distributions, which can be used to take the derivative of any function whatsoever.
Limits are not the only rigorous approach to the foundation of calculus.
Another way is to use Abraham Robinson's non-standard analysis.
Robinson's approach, developed in the 1960s, uses technical machinery from mathematical logic to augment the real number system with infinitesimal and infinite numbers, as in the original Newton-Leibniz conception.
The resulting numbers are called hyperreal numbers, and they can be used to give a Leibniz-like development of the usual rules of calculus.
There is also smooth infinitesimal analysis, which differs from non-standard analysis in that it mandates neglecting higher-power infinitesimals during derivations.
Based on the ideas of F.
Lawvere and employing the methods of category theory, smooth infinitesimal analysis views all functions as being continuous and incapable of being expressed in terms of discrete entities.
One aspect of this formulation is that the law of excluded middle does not hold.
The law of excluded middle is also rejected in constructive mathematics, a branch of mathematics that insists that proofs of the existence of a number, function, or other mathematical object should give a construction of the object.
Reformulations of calculus in a constructive framework are generally part of the subject of constructive analysis.
While many of the ideas of calculus had been developed earlier in Greece, China, India, Iraq, Persia, and Japan, the use of calculus began in Europe, during the 17th century, when Newton and Leibniz built on the work of earlier mathematicians to introduce its basic principles.
The calculus was the first achievement of modern mathematics and it is difficult to overestimate its importance.
I think it defines more unequivocally than anything else the inception of modern mathematics, and the system of mathematical analysis, which is its logical development, still constitutes the greatest technical advance in exact thinking.
Applications of differential calculus include computations involving velocity and acceleration, the slope of a curve, and optimization.
Applications of integral calculus include computations involving area, volume, arc length, center of mass, work, and pressure.
More advanced applications include power series and Fourier series.
Calculus is also used to gain a more precise understanding of the nature of space, time, and motion.
For centuries, mathematicians and philosophers wrestled with paradoxes involving division by zero or sums of infinitely many numbers.
These questions arise in the study of motion and area.
The ancient Greek philosopher Zeno of Elea gave several famous examples of such paradoxes.
Calculus provides tools, especially the limit and the infinite series, that resolve the paradoxes.
Calculus is used in every branch of the physical sciences, actuarial science, computer science, statistics, engineering, economics, business, medicine, demography, and in other fields wherever a problem can be mathematically modeled and an optimal solution is desired.
It allows one to go from (non-constant) rates of change to the total change or vice versa, and many times in studying a problem we know one and are trying to find the other.
Calculus can be used in conjunction with other mathematical disciplines.
For example, it can be used with linear algebra to find the "best fit" linear approximation for a set of points in a domain.
Or, it can be used in probability theory to determine the expectation value of a continuous random variable given a probability density function.
In analytic geometry, the study of graphs of functions, calculus is used to find high points and low points (maxima and minima), slope, concavity, inflection points, area under curves, and area between curves.
Calculus is also used to find approximate solutions to equations; in practice, it is the standard way to solve differential equations and do root finding in most applications.
Examples are methods such as Newton's method, fixed point iteration, and linear approximation.
For instance, spacecraft use a variation of the Euler method to approximate curved courses within zero-gravity environments.
Physics makes particular use of calculus; all concepts in classical mechanics and electromagnetism are related through calculus.
The mass of an object of known density, the moment of inertia of objects, and the potential energies due to gravitational and electromagnetic forces can all be found by the use of calculus.
An example of the use of calculus in mechanics is Newton's second law of motion, which states that the derivative of an object's momentum concerning time equals the net force upon it.
Alternatively, Newton's second law can be expressed by saying that the net force equals the object's mass times its acceleration, which is the time derivative of velocity and thus the second time derivative of spatial position.
Starting from knowing how an object is accelerating, we use calculus to derive its path.
Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism and Einstein's theory of general relativity are also expressed in the language of differential calculus.
Differential equations are likewise prominent in quantum mechanics.
Chemistry also uses calculus, for example in determining reaction rates and in studying radioactive decay.
In biology, population dynamics starts with reproduction and death rates to model population changes.
In the realm of medicine, calculus can be used in many ways, from predicting the optimal branching angle of a blood vessel to maximize flow, to understanding how quickly a drug is eliminated from a body or how quickly a cancerous tumor grows.
In economics, calculus allows for the determination of maximal profit by providing a way to easily calculate both marginal cost and marginal revenue.
The Black–Scholes model, a central concept in option pricing, employs a differential equation.
Topics on Calculus at PlanetMath.
Calculus Made Easy (1914) by Silvanus P.
The Role of Calculus in College Mathematics Archived 26 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine from ERICDigests.
Infinitesimal Calculus – an article on its historical development, in Encyclopedia of Mathematics, ed.
Daniel Kleitman, MIT.
Calculus training materials at imomath.
Statistics (from German: Statistik, orig.
In applying statistics to a scientific, industrial, or social problem, it is conventional to begin with a statistical population or a statistical model to be studied.
Populations can be diverse groups of people or objects such as "all people living in a country" or "every atom composing a crystal".
Statistics deals with every aspect of data, including the planning of data collection in terms of the design of surveys and experiments.
Statistics is deeply related to subjects like physics, chemistry, geography, geopolitics, and especially mathematics.
When census data (comprising every member of the target population) cannot be collected, statisticians collect data by developing specific experiment designs and survey samples.
Representative sampling assures that inferences and conclusions can reasonably extend from the sample to the population as a whole.
An experimental study involves taking measurements of the system under study, manipulating the system, and then taking additional measurements using the same procedure to determine if the manipulation has modified the values of the measurements.
In contrast, an observational study does not involve experimental manipulation.
Two main statistical methods are used in data analysis: descriptive statistics, which summarize data from a sample using indexes such as the mean or standard deviation, and inferential statistics, which draw conclusions from data that are subject to random variation (e.
Descriptive statistics are most often concerned with two sets of properties of a distribution (sample or population): central tendency (or location) seeks to characterize the distribution's central or typical value, while dispersion (or variability) characterizes the extent to which members of the distribution depart from its center and each other.
Inferences made using mathematical statistics employ the framework of probability theory, which deals with the analysis of random phenomena.
A standard statistical procedure involves the collection of data leading to a test of the relationship between two statistical data sets, or a data set and synthetic data drawn from an idealized model.
A hypothesis is proposed for the statistical relationship between the two data sets, an alternative to an idealized null hypothesis of no relationship between two data sets.
Rejecting or disproving the null hypothesis is done using statistical tests that quantify the sense in which the null can be proven false, given the data that are used in the test.
Working from a null hypothesis, two basic forms of error are recognized: Type I errors (null hypothesis is rejected when it is in fact true, giving a "false positive") and Type II errors (null hypothesis fails to be rejected when it is in fact false, giving a "false negative").
Multiple problems have come to be associated with this framework, ranging from obtaining a sufficient sample size to specifying an adequate null hypothesis.
Statistical measurement processes are also prone to error with regard to the data they generate.
Many of these errors are classified as random (noise) or systematic (bias), but other types of errors (e.
The presence of missing data or censoring may result in biased estimates, and specific techniques have been developed to address these problems.
Statistics is the discipline that deals with data, facts and figures with which meaningful information is inferred.
Data may represent a numerical value, in form of quantitative data, or a label, as with qualitative data.
Data may be collected, presented and summarised, in one of two methods called descriptive statistics.
Two elementary summaries of data, singularly called a statistic, are the mean and dispersion.
Whereas inferential statistics interprets data from a population sample to induce statements and predictions about a population.
Statistics is regarded as a body of science or a branch of mathematics.
It is based on probability, a branch of mathematics that studies random events.
Statistics is considered the science of uncertainty.
This arises from the ways to cope with measurement and sampling error as well as dealing with uncertanties in modelling.
Although probability and statistics were once paired together as a single subject, they are conceptually distinct from one another.
The former is based on deducing answers to specific situations from a general theory of probability, meanwhile statistics induces statements about a population based on a data set.
Statistics serves to bridge the gap between probability and applied mathematical fields.
Some consider statistics to be a distinct mathematical science rather than a branch of mathematics.
While many scientific investigations make use of data, statistics is generally concerned with the use of data in the context of uncertainty and decision-making in the face of uncertainty.
Statistics is indexed at 62, a subclass of probability theory and stochastic processes, in the Mathematics Subject Classification.
Mathematical statistics is covered in the range 276-280 of subclass QA (science > mathematics) in the Library of Congress Classification.
The word statistics ultimately comes from the Latin word Status, meaning "situation" or "condition" in society, which in late Latin adopted the meaning "state".
Derived from this, political scientist Gottfried Achenwall, coined the German word statistik (a summary of how things stand).
In 1770, the term entered the English language through German and referred to the study of political arrangements.
The term gained its modern meaning in the 1790s in John Sinclair's works.
In modern German, the term statistik is synonymous with mathematical statistics.
The term statistic, in singular form, is used to describe a function that returns its value of the same name.
When census data cannot be collected, statisticians collect sample data by developing specific experiment designs and survey samples.
Statistics itself also provides tools for prediction and forecasting through statistical models.
To use a sample as a guide to an entire population, it is important that it truly represents the overall population.
Representative sampling ensures that inferences and conclusions can safely be extended from the sample to the population as a whole.
A major problem lies in determining the extent to which the chosen sample is actually representative.
Statistics offers methods to estimate and correct for any bias in the sample and data collection procedures.
There are also methods of experimental design that can lessen these issues at the outset of a study, strengthening its ability to discern truths about the population.
Sampling theory is part of the mathematical discipline of probability theory.
Probability is used in mathematical statistics to study the sampling distributions of sample statistics and, more generally, the properties of statistical procedures.
The use of any statistical method is valid only when the system or population under consideration satisfies the assumptions of the method.
The difference in point of view between classic probability theory and sampling theory is, roughly, that probability theory starts with the given parameters of a total population to deduce probabilities that pertain to samples.
Statistical inference, however, moves in the opposite direction—inductively inferring from samples to the parameters of a larger or total population.
A common goal for a statistical research project is to investigate causality, and in particular to draw a conclusion on the effect of changes in the values of predictors or independent variables on dependent variables.
There are two major types of causal statistical studies: experimental studies and observational studies.
In both types of studies, the effect of differences of an independent variable (or variables) on the behavior of the dependent variable are observed.
The difference between the two types lies in how the study is actually conducted.
Each can be very effective.
An experimental study involves taking measurements of the system under study, manipulating the system, and then taking additional measurements with different levels using the same procedure to determine if the manipulation has modified the values of the measurements.
In contrast, an observational study does not involve experimental manipulation.
Instead, data are gathered and correlations between predictors and response are investigated.
While the tools of data analysis work best on data from randomized studies, they are also applied to other kinds of data—like natural experiments and observational studies—for which a statistician would use a modified, more structured estimation method (e.
Planning the research, including finding the number of replicates of the study, using the following information: preliminary estimates regarding the size of treatment effects, alternative hypotheses, and the estimated experimental variability.
Consideration of the selection of experimental subjects and the ethics of research is necessary.
Statisticians recommend that experiments compare (at least) one new treatment with a standard treatment or control, to allow an unbiased estimate of the difference in treatment effects.
Design of experiments, using blocking to reduce the influence of confounding variables, and randomized assignment of treatments to subjects to allow unbiased estimates of treatment effects and experimental error.
At this stage, the experimenters and statisticians write the experimental protocol that will guide the performance of the experiment and which specifies the primary analysis of the experimental data.
Performing the experiment following the experimental protocol and analyzing the data following the experimental protocol.
Further examining the data set in secondary analyses, to suggest new hypotheses for future study.
Documenting and presenting the results of the study.
Experiments on human behavior have special concerns.
The famous Hawthorne study examined changes to the working environment at the Hawthorne plant of the Western Electric Company.
The researchers were interested in determining whether increased illumination would increase the productivity of the assembly line workers.
The researchers first measured the productivity in the plant, then modified the illumination in an area of the plant and checked if the changes in illumination affected productivity.
It turned out that productivity indeed improved (under the experimental conditions).
However, the study is heavily criticized today for errors in experimental procedures, specifically for the lack of a control group and blindness.
The Hawthorne effect refers to finding that an outcome (in this case, worker productivity) changed due to observation itself.
Those in the Hawthorne study became more productive not because the lighting was changed but because they were being observed.
An example of an observational study is one that explores the association between smoking and lung cancer.
This type of study typically uses a survey to collect observations about the area of interest and then performs statistical analysis.
In this case, the researchers would collect observations of both smokers and non-smokers, perhaps through a cohort study, and then look for the number of cases of lung cancer in each group.
A case-control study is another type of observational study in which people with and without the outcome of interest (e.
Various attempts have been made to produce a taxonomy of levels of measurement.
The psychophysicist Stanley Smith Stevens defined nominal, ordinal, interval, and ratio scales.
Nominal measurements do not have meaningful rank order among values, and permit any one-to-one (injective) transformation.
Ordinal measurements have imprecise differences between consecutive values, but have a meaningful order to those values, and permit any order-preserving transformation.
Interval measurements have meaningful distances between measurements defined, but the zero value is arbitrary (as in the case with longitude and temperature measurements in Celsius or Fahrenheit), and permit any linear transformation.
Ratio measurements have both a meaningful zero value and the distances between different measurements defined, and permit any rescaling transformation.
Because variables conforming only to nominal or ordinal measurements cannot be reasonably measured numerically, sometimes they are grouped together as categorical variables, whereas ratio and interval measurements are grouped together as quantitative variables, which can be either discrete or continuous, due to their numerical nature.
Such distinctions can often be loosely correlated with data type in computer science, in that dichotomous categorical variables may be represented with the Boolean data type, polytomous categorical variables with arbitrarily assigned integers in the integral data type, and continuous variables with the real data type involving floating-point arithmetic.
But the mapping of computer science data types to statistical data types depends on which categorization of the latter is being implemented.
Other categorizations have been proposed.
For example, Mosteller and Tukey (1977) distinguished grades, ranks, counted fractions, counts, amounts, and balances.
Nelder (1990) described continuous counts, continuous ratios, count ratios, and categorical modes of data.
The issue of whether it is appropriate to apply different kinds of statistical methods to data obtained from different kinds of measurement procedures is complicated by issues concerning the transformation of variables and the precise interpretation of research questions.
Whether a transformation is sensible to contemplate depends on the question one is trying to answer.
A descriptive statistic (in the count noun sense) is a summary statistic that quantitatively describes or summarizes features of a collection of information, while descriptive statistics in the mass noun sense is the process of using and analyzing those statistics.
Descriptive statistics is distinguished from inferential statistics (or inductive statistics), in that descriptive statistics aims to summarize a sample, rather than use the data to learn about the population that the sample of data is thought to represent.
Statistical inference is the process of using data analysis to deduce properties of an underlying probability distribution.
Inferential statistical analysis infers properties of a population, for example by testing hypotheses and deriving estimates.
It is assumed that the observed data set is sampled from a larger population.
Inferential statistics can be contrasted with descriptive statistics.
Descriptive statistics is solely concerned with properties of the observed data, and it does not rest on the assumption that the data come from a larger population.
Consider independent identically distributed (IID) random variables with a given probability distribution: standard statistical inference and estimation theory defines a random sample as the random vector given by the column vector of these IID variables.
The population being examined is described by a probability distribution that may have unknown parameters.
A statistic is a random variable that is a function of the random sample, but not a function of unknown parameters.
The probability distribution of the statistic, though, may have unknown parameters.
Consider now a function of the unknown parameter: an estimator is a statistic used to estimate such function.
Commonly used estimators include sample mean, unbiased sample variance and sample covariance.
A random variable that is a function of the random sample and of the unknown parameter, but whose probability distribution does not depend on the unknown parameter is called a pivotal quantity or pivot.
Widely used pivots include the z-score, the chi square statistic and Student's t-value.
Between two estimators of a given parameter, the one with lower mean squared error is said to be more efficient.
Furthermore, an estimator is said to be unbiased if its expected value is equal to the true value of the unknown parameter being estimated, and asymptotically unbiased if its expected value converges at the limit to the true value of such parameter.
Other desirable properties for estimators include: UMVUE estimators that have the lowest variance for all possible values of the parameter to be estimated (this is usually an easier property to verify than efficiency) and consistent estimators which converges in probability to the true value of such parameter.
This still leaves the question of how to obtain estimators in a given situation and carry the computation, several methods have been proposed: the method of moments, the maximum likelihood method, the least squares method and the more recent method of estimating equations.
Interpretation of statistical information can often involve the development of a null hypothesis which is usually (but not necessarily) that no relationship exists among variables or that no change occurred over time.
The alternative hypothesis is the name of the hypothesis that contradicts the null hypothesis.
The best illustration for a novice is the predicament encountered by a criminal trial.
The null hypothesis, H0, asserts that the defendant is innocent, whereas the alternative hypothesis, H1, asserts that the defendant is guilty.
The indictment comes because of suspicion of the guilt.
The H0 (the status quo) stands in opposition to H1 and is maintained unless H1 is supported by evidence "beyond a reasonable doubt".
However, "failure to reject H0" in this case does not imply innocence, but merely that the evidence was insufficient to convict.
So the jury does not necessarily accept H0 but fails to reject H0.
While one can not "prove" a null hypothesis, one can test how close it is to being true with a power test, which tests for type II errors.
The null hypothesis cannot be proven true because it is already assumed to be true when the test is being conducted.
Type I errors where the null hypothesis is falsely rejected, giving a "false positive".
Type II errors where the null hypothesis fails to be rejected and an actual difference between populations is missed, giving a "false negative".
Standard deviation refers to the extent to which individual observations in a sample differ from a central value, such as the sample or population mean, while Standard error refers to an estimate of difference between sample mean and population mean.
A statistical error is the amount by which an observation differs from its expected value.
A residual is the amount an observation differs from the value the estimator of the expected value assumes on a given sample (also called prediction).
Mean squared error is used for obtaining efficient estimators, a widely used class of estimators.
Root mean square error is simply the square root of mean squared error.
Many statistical methods seek to minimize the residual sum of squares, and these are called "methods of least squares" in contrast to Least absolute deviations.
The latter gives equal weight to small and big errors, while the former gives more weight to large errors.
Residual sum of squares is also differentiable, which provides a handy property for doing regression.
Least squares applied to linear regression is called ordinary least squares method and least squares applied to nonlinear regression is called non-linear least squares.
Also in a linear regression model the non deterministic part of the model is called error term, disturbance or more simply noise.
Both linear regression and non-linear regression are addressed in polynomial least squares, which also describes the variance in a prediction of the dependent variable (y axis) as a function of the independent variable (x axis) and the deviations (errors, noise, disturbances) from the estimated (fitted) curve.
Measurement processes that generate statistical data are also subject to error.
Many of these errors are classified as random (noise) or systematic (bias), but other types of errors (e.
The presence of missing data or censoring may result in biased estimates and specific techniques have been developed to address these problems.
Most studies only sample part of a population, so results do not fully represent the whole population.
Any estimates obtained from the sample only approximate the population value.
Confidence intervals allow statisticians to express how closely the sample estimate matches the true value in the whole population.
Often they are expressed as 95% confidence intervals.
Formally, a 95% confidence interval for a value is a range where, if the sampling and analysis were repeated under the same conditions (yielding a different dataset), the interval would include the true (population) value in 95% of all possible cases.
This does not imply that the probability that the true value is in the confidence interval is 95%.
From the frequentist perspective, such a claim does not even make sense, as the true value is not a random variable.
Either the true value is or is not within the given interval.
However, it is true that, before any data are sampled and given a plan for how to construct the confidence interval, the probability is 95% that the yet-to-be-calculated interval will cover the true value: at this point, the limits of the interval are yet-to-be-observed random variables.
One approach that does yield an interval that can be interpreted as having a given probability of containing the true value is to use a credible interval from Bayesian statistics: this approach depends on a different way of interpreting what is meant by "probability", that is as a Bayesian probability.
In principle, confidence intervals can be symmetrical or asymmetrical.
An interval can be asymmetrical because it works as a lower or upper bound for a parameter (left-sided interval or right sided interval), but it can also be asymmetrical if a two-sided interval is built violating symmetry around the estimate.
Sometimes the bounds of a confidence interval are reached asymptotically, and these are used to approximate the true bounds.
Statistics rarely give a simple Yes/No type answer to the question under analysis.
Interpretation often comes down to the level of statistical significance applied to the numbers and often refers to the probability of a value accurately rejecting the null hypothesis (sometimes referred to as the p-value).
The standard approach is to test a null hypothesis against an alternative hypothesis.
A critical region is the set of values of the estimator that leads to refuting the null hypothesis.
The probability of type I error is therefore the probability that the estimator belongs to the critical region given that null hypothesis is true (statistical significance) and the probability of type II error is the probability that the estimator does not belong to the critical region given that the alternative hypothesis is true.
The statistical power of a test is the probability that it correctly rejects the null hypothesis when the null hypothesis is false.
Referring to statistical significance does not necessarily mean that the overall result is significant in real-world terms.
For example, in a large study of a drug it may be shown that the drug has a statistically significant but very small beneficial effect, such that it is unlikely to help the patient noticeably.
Although in principle the acceptable level of statistical significance may be subject to debate, the significance level is the largest p-value that allows the test to reject the null hypothesis.
This test is logically equivalent to saying that the p-value is the probability, assuming the null hypothesis is true, of observing a result at least as extreme as the test statistic.
Therefore, the smaller the significance level, the lower the probability of committing type I error.
A difference that is highly statistically significant can still be of no practical significance, but it is possible to properly formulate tests to account for this.
One response involves going beyond reporting only the significance level to include the p-value when reporting whether a hypothesis is rejected or accepted.
The p-value, however, does not indicate the size or importance of the observed effect and can also seem to exaggerate the importance of minor differences in large studies.
A better and increasingly common approach is to report confidence intervals.
Although these are produced from the same calculations as those of hypothesis tests or p-values, they describe both the size of the effect and the uncertainty surrounding it.
Fallacy of the transposed conditional, aka prosecutor's fallacy: criticisms arise because the hypothesis testing approach forces one hypothesis (the null hypothesis) to be favored, since what is being evaluated is the probability of the observed result given the null hypothesis and not probability of the null hypothesis given the observed result.
An alternative to this approach is offered by Bayesian inference, although it requires establishing a prior probability.
Rejecting the null hypothesis does not automatically prove the alternative hypothesis.
As everything in inferential statistics it relies on sample size, and therefore under fat tails p-values may be seriously mis-computed.
An alternative paradigm to the popular frequentist paradigm is to use Bayes' theorem to update the prior probability of the hypotheses in consideration based on the relative likelihood of the evidence gathered to obtain a posterior probability.
Bayesian methods have been aided by the increase in available computing power to compute the posterior probability using numerical approximation techniques like Markov Chain Monte Carlo.
The concept of using likelihood ratio can also be prominently seen in medical diagnostic testing.
Exploratory data analysis (EDA) is an approach to analyzing data sets to summarize their main characteristics, often with visual methods.
A statistical model can be used or not, but primarily EDA is for seeing what the data can tell us beyond the formal modeling or hypothesis testing task.
Mathematical statistics is the application of mathematics to statistics.
Mathematical techniques used for this include mathematical analysis, linear algebra, stochastic analysis, differential equations, and measure-theoretic probability theory.
All statistical analyses make use of at least some mathematics, and mathematical statistics can therefore be regarded as a fundamental component of general statistics.
Formal discussions on inference date back to the mathematicians and cryptographers of the Islamic Golden Age between the 8th and 13th centuries.
Al-Khalil (717–786) wrote the Book of Cryptographic Messages, which contains one of the first uses of permutations and combinations, to list all possible Arabic words with and without vowels.
Al-Kindi's Manuscript on Deciphering Cryptographic Messages gave a detailed description of how to use frequency analysis to decipher encrypted messages, providing an early example of statistical inference for decoding.
Ibn Adlan (1187–1268) later made an important contribution on the use of sample size in frequency analysis.
Although the term statistic was introduced by the Italian scholar Girolamo Ghilini in 1589 with reference to a collection of facts and information about a state, it was the German Gottfried Achenwall in 1749 who started using the term as a collection of quantitative information, in the modern use for this science.
The earliest writing containing statistics in Europe dates back to 1663, with the publication of Natural and Political Observations upon the Bills of Mortality by John Graunt.
Early applications of statistical thinking revolved around the needs of states to base policy on demographic and economic data, hence its stat- etymology.
The scope of the discipline of statistics broadened in the early 19th century to include the collection and analysis of data in general.
Today, statistics is widely employed in government, business, and natural and social sciences.
The mathematical foundations of statistics developed from discussions concerning games of chance among mathematicians such as Gerolamo Cardano, Blaise Pascal, Pierre de Fermat, and Christiaan Huygens.
Although the idea of probability was already examined in ancient and medieval law and philosophy (such as the work of Juan Caramuel), probability theory as a mathematical discipline only took shape at the very end of the 17th century, particularly in Jacob Bernoulli's posthumous work Ars Conjectandi.
This was the first book where the realm of games of chance and the realm of the probable (which concerned opinion, evidence, and argument) were combined and submitted to mathematical analysis.
The method of least squares was first described by Adrien-Marie Legendre in 1805, though Carl Friedrich Gauss presumably made use of it a decade earlier in 1795.
In the 1830s-1850s, "statistical offices" and national "statistical societies" were founded in Europe and America, and in the mid-19th century, the idea arose of "organized contacts between the statisticians of different countries although informal contacts occurred earlier".
In those days, the name "statistics" referred mainly to "matters of state", and British statisticians were often called "statists".
Belgian scientist Adolphe Quetelet (1796–1874) introduced the notion of the "average man" (l'homme moyen) as a means of understanding complex social phenomena such as crime rates, marriage rates, and suicide rates.
In 1853 Quetelet organised in Brussels the First International Statistical Congress in order to unify measurement in statistical research.
The modern field of statistics emerged in the late 19th and early 20th century in three stages.
The first wave, at the turn of the century, was led by the work of Francis Galton and Karl Pearson, who transformed statistics into a rigorous mathematical discipline used for analysis, not just in science, but in industry and politics as well.
Galton's contributions included introducing the concepts of standard deviation, correlation, regression analysis and the application of these methods to the study of the variety of human characteristics—height, weight and eyelash length among others.
Pearson developed the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient, defined as a product-moment, the method of moments for the fitting of distributions to samples and the Pearson distribution, among many other things.
Galton and Pearson founded Biometrika as the first journal of mathematical statistics and biostatistics (then called biometry), and the latter founded the world's first university statistics department at University College London.
The second wave of the 1910s and 20s was initiated by William Sealy Gosset, and reached its culmination in the insights of Ronald Fisher, who wrote the textbooks that were to define the academic discipline in universities around the world.
Fisher's most important publications were his 1918 seminal paper The Correlation between Relatives on the Supposition of Mendelian Inheritance (which was the first to use the statistical term, variance), his classic 1925 work Statistical Methods for Research Workers and his 1935 The Design of Experiments, where he developed rigorous design of experiments models.
He originated the concepts of sufficiency, ancillary statistics, Fisher's linear discriminator and Fisher information.
He also coined the term null hypothesis during the Lady tasting tea experiment, which "is never proved or established, but is possibly disproved, in the course of experimentation".
In his 1930 book The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection, he applied statistics to various biological concepts such as Fisher's principle (which A.
Edwards called "probably the most celebrated argument in evolutionary biology") and Fisherian runaway, a concept in sexual selection about a positive feedback runaway effect found in evolution.
The final wave, which mainly saw the refinement and expansion of earlier developments, emerged from the collaborative work between Egon Pearson and Jerzy Neyman in the 1930s.
They introduced the concepts of "Type II" error, power of a test and confidence intervals.
Jerzy Neyman in 1934 showed that stratified random sampling was in general a better method of estimation than purposive (quota) sampling.
Among the early attempts to measure national economic activity were those of William Petty in the 17th century.
In the 20th century the uniform System of National Accounts was developed.
Today, statistical methods are applied in all fields that involve decision making, for making accurate inferences from a collated body of data and for making decisions in the face of uncertainty based on statistical methodology.
The use of modern computers has expedited large-scale statistical computations and has also made possible new methods that are impractical to perform manually.
Statistics continues to be an area of active research, for example on the problem of how to analyze big data.
Applied statistics, sometimes referred to as Statistical science, comprises descriptive statistics and the application of inferential statistics.
Theoretical statistics concerns the logical arguments underlying justification of approaches to statistical inference, as well as encompassing mathematical statistics.
Mathematical statistics includes not only the manipulation of probability distributions necessary for deriving results related to methods of estimation and inference, but also various aspects of computational statistics and the design of experiments.
Statistical consultants can help organizations and companies that do not have in-house expertise relevant to their particular questions.
Machine learning models are statistical and probabilistic models that capture patterns in the data through use of computational algorithms.
Statistics is applicable to a wide variety of academic disciplines, including natural and social sciences, government, and business.
Business statistics applies statistical methods in econometrics, auditing and production and operations, including services improvement and marketing research.
A study of two journals in tropical biology found that the 12 most frequent statistical tests are: analysis of variance (ANOVA), chi-squared test, Student's t-test, linear regression, Pearson's correlation coefficient, Mann-Whitney U test, Kruskal-Wallis test, Shannon's diversity index, Tukey's range test, cluster analysis, Spearman's rank correlation coefficient and principal component analysis.
A typical statistics course covers descriptive statistics, probability, binomial and normal distributions, test of hypotheses and confidence intervals, linear regression, and correlation.
Modern fundamental statistical courses for undergraduate students focus on correct test selection, results interpretation, and use of free statistics software.
The rapid and sustained increases in computing power starting from the second half of the 20th century have had a substantial impact on the practice of statistical science.
Early statistical models were almost always from the class of linear models, but powerful computers, coupled with suitable numerical algorithms, caused an increased interest in nonlinear models (such as neural networks) as well as the creation of new types, such as generalized linear models and multilevel models.
Increased computing power has also led to the growing popularity of computationally intensive methods based on resampling, such as permutation tests and the bootstrap, while techniques such as Gibbs sampling have made use of Bayesian models more feasible.
The computer revolution has implications for the future of statistics with a new emphasis on "experimental" and "empirical" statistics.
A large number of both general and special purpose statistical software are now available.
Examples of available software capable of complex statistical computation include programs such as Mathematica, SAS, SPSS, and R.
In business, "statistics" is a widely used management- and decision support tool.
It is particularly applied in financial management, marketing management, and production, services and operations management.
Statistics is also heavily used in management accounting and auditing.
The discipline of Management Science formalizes the use of statistics, and other mathematics, in business.
A typical "Business Statistics" course is intended for business majors, and covers descriptive statistics (collection, description, analysis, and summary of data), probability (typically the binomial and normal distributions), test of hypotheses and confidence intervals, linear regression, and correlation; (follow-on) courses may include forecasting, time series, decision trees, multiple linear regression, and other topics from business analytics more generally.
Professional certification programs, such as the CFA, often include topics in statistics.
Statistical techniques are used in a wide range of types of scientific and social research, including: biostatistics, computational biology, computational sociology, network biology, social science, sociology and social research.
Some fields of inquiry use applied statistics so extensively that they have specialized terminology.
Statistics form a key basis tool in business and manufacturing as well.
It is used to understand measurement systems variability, control processes (as in statistical process control or SPC), for summarizing data, and to make data-driven decisions.
Misuse of statistics can produce subtle but serious errors in description and interpretation—subtle in the sense that even experienced professionals make such errors, and serious in the sense that they can lead to devastating decision errors.
For instance, social policy, medical practice, and the reliability of structures like bridges all rely on the proper use of statistics.
Even when statistical techniques are correctly applied, the results can be difficult to interpret for those lacking expertise.
The statistical significance of a trend in the data—which measures the extent to which a trend could be caused by random variation in the sample—may or may not agree with an intuitive sense of its significance.
The set of basic statistical skills (and skepticism) that people need to deal with information in their everyday lives properly is referred to as statistical literacy.
There is a general perception that statistical knowledge is all-too-frequently intentionally misused by finding ways to interpret only the data that are favorable to the presenter.
A mistrust and misunderstanding of statistics is associated with the quotation, "There are three kinds of lies: lies, damned lies, and statistics".
Misuse of statistics can be both inadvertent and intentional, and the book How to Lie with Statistics, by Darrell Huff, outlines a range of considerations.
In an attempt to shed light on the use and misuse of statistics, reviews of statistical techniques used in particular fields are conducted (e.
Warne, Lazo, Ramos, and Ritter (2012)).
Ways to avoid misuse of statistics include using proper diagrams and avoiding bias.
Misuse can occur when conclusions are overgeneralized and claimed to be representative of more than they really are, often by either deliberately or unconsciously overlooking sampling bias.
Bar graphs are arguably the easiest diagrams to use and understand, and they can be made either by hand or with simple computer programs.
Most people do not look for bias or errors, so they are not noticed.
Thus, people may often believe that something is true even if it is not well represented.
To make data gathered from statistics believable and accurate, the sample taken must be representative of the whole.
According to Huff, "The dependability of a sample can be destroyed by [bias].
Did someone change the subject?
The concept of correlation is particularly noteworthy for the potential confusion it can cause.
Statistical analysis of a data set often reveals that two variables (properties) of the population under consideration tend to vary together, as if they were connected.
For example, a study of annual income that also looks at age of death, might find that poor people tend to have shorter lives than affluent people.
The two variables are said to be correlated; however, they may or may not be the cause of one another.
The correlation phenomena could be caused by a third, previously unconsidered phenomenon, called a lurking variable or confounding variable.
For this reason, there is no way to immediately infer the existence of a causal relationship between the two variables.
Lydia Denworth, "A Significant Problem: Standard scientific methods are under fire.
Will anything change?
There is growing determination to reform statistical analysis.
Some [researchers] suggest changing statistical methods, whereas others would do away with a threshold for defining "significant" results".
Barbara Illowsky; Susan Dean (2014).
Introductory Statistics.
Stockburger, David W.
Missouri State University (3rd Web ed.
Archived from the original on 28 May 2020.
Statistics in Psychology: Explanations without Equations.
American Psychologist.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 October 2017.
Gigerenzer, G (2004).
Journal of Socio-Economics.
Data Science Textbook.
Online Statistics Education: An Interactive Multimedia Course of Study.
Developed by Rice University (Lead Developer), University of Houston Clear Lake, Tufts University, and National Science Foundation.
A prime number (or a prime) is a natural number greater than 1 that is not a product of two smaller natural numbers.
A natural number greater than 1 that is not prime is called a composite number.
For example, 5 is prime because the only ways of writing it as a product, 1 × 5 or 5 × 1, involve 5 itself.
However, 4 is composite because it is a product (2 × 2) in which both numbers are smaller than 4.
Primes are central in number theory because of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic: every natural number greater than 1 is either a prime itself or can be factorized as a product of primes that is unique up to their order.
The property of being prime is called primality.
Faster algorithms include the Miller–Rabin primality test, which is fast but has a small chance of error, and the AKS primality test, which always produces the correct answer in polynomial time but is too slow to be practical.
Particularly fast methods are available for numbers of special forms, such as Mersenne numbers.
As of October 2024 the largest known prime number is a Mersenne prime with 41,024,320 decimal digits.
There are infinitely many primes, as demonstrated by Euclid around 300 BC.
No known simple formula separates prime numbers from composite numbers.
However, the distribution of primes within the natural numbers in the large can be statistically modelled.
The first result in that direction is the prime number theorem, proven at the end of the 19th century, which says roughly that the probability of a randomly chosen large number being prime is inversely proportional to its number of digits, that is, to its logarithm.
Several historical questions regarding prime numbers are still unsolved.
These include Goldbach's conjecture, that every even integer greater than 2 can be expressed as the sum of two primes, and the twin prime conjecture, that there are infinitely many pairs of primes that differ by two.
Such questions spurred the development of various branches of number theory, focusing on analytic or algebraic aspects of numbers.
Primes are used in several routines in information technology, such as public-key cryptography, which relies on the difficulty of factoring large numbers into their prime factors.
In abstract algebra, objects that behave in a generalized way like prime numbers include prime elements and prime ideals.
A natural number (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.
The numbers greater than 1 that are not prime are called composite numbers.
For example, among the numbers 1 through 6, the numbers 2, 3, and 5 are the prime numbers, as there are no other numbers that divide them evenly (without a remainder).
Every natural number has both 1 and itself as a divisor.
If it has any other divisor, it cannot be prime.
This leads to an equivalent definition of prime numbers: they are the numbers with exactly two positive divisors.
Those two are 1 and the number itself.
As 1 has only one divisor, itself, it is not prime by this definition.
Therefore, every prime number other than 2 is an odd number, and is called an odd prime.
Similarly, when written in the usual decimal system, all prime numbers larger than 5 end in 1, 3, 7, or 9.
The numbers that end with other digits are all composite: decimal numbers that end in 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8 are even, and decimal numbers that end in 0 or 5 are divisible by 5.
The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus, from around 1550 BC, has Egyptian fraction expansions of different forms for prime and composite numbers.
However, the earliest surviving records of the study of prime numbers come from the ancient Greek mathematicians, who called them prōtos arithmòs (πρῶτος ἀριθμὸς).
Euclid's Elements (c.
Another Greek invention, the Sieve of Eratosthenes, is still used to construct lists of primes.
He also conjectured that all even perfect numbers come from Euclid's construction using Mersenne primes, but was unable to prove it.
Another Islamic mathematician, Ibn al-Banna' al-Marrakushi, observed that the sieve of Eratosthenes can be sped up by considering only the prime divisors up to the square root of the upper limit.
Fibonacci took the innovations from Islamic mathematics to Europe.
His book Liber Abaci (1202) was the first to describe trial division for testing primality, again using divisors only up to the square root.
In 1640 Pierre de Fermat stated (without proof) Fermat's little theorem (later proved by Leibniz and Euler).
Christian Goldbach formulated Goldbach's conjecture, that every even number is the sum of two primes, in a 1742 letter to Euler.
Euler proved Alhazen's conjecture (now the Euclid–Euler theorem) that all even perfect numbers can be constructed from Mersenne primes.
Ideas of Bernhard Riemann in his 1859 paper on the zeta-function sketched an outline for proving the conjecture of Legendre and Gauss.
Although the closely related Riemann hypothesis remains unproven, Riemann's outline was completed in 1896 by Hadamard and de la Vallée Poussin, and the result is now known as the prime number theorem.
Another important 19th century result was Dirichlet's theorem on arithmetic progressions, that certain arithmetic progressions contain infinitely many primes.
Many mathematicians have worked on primality tests for numbers larger than those where trial division is practicably applicable.
Methods that are restricted to specific number forms include Pépin's test for Fermat numbers (1877), Proth's theorem (c.
Since 1951 all the largest known primes have been found using these tests on computers.
The search for ever larger primes has generated interest outside mathematical circles, through the Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search and other distributed computing projects.
The idea that prime numbers had few applications outside of pure mathematics was shattered in the 1970s when public-key cryptography and the RSA cryptosystem were invented, using prime numbers as their basis.
The increased practical importance of computerized primality testing and factorization led to the development of improved methods capable of handling large numbers of unrestricted form.
The mathematical theory of prime numbers also moved forward with the Green–Tao theorem (2004) that there are arbitrarily long arithmetic progressions of prime numbers, and Yitang Zhang's 2013 proof that there exist infinitely many prime gaps of bounded size.
Most early Greeks did not even consider 1 to be a number, so they could not consider its primality.
The medieval Islamic mathematicians largely followed the Greeks in viewing 1 as not being a number.
By the Middle Ages and Renaissance, mathematicians began treating 1 as a number, and by the 17th century some of them included it as the first prime number.
In the mid-18th century, Christian Goldbach listed 1 as prime in his correspondence with Leonhard Euler; however, Euler himself did not consider 1 to be prime.
Many 19th century mathematicians still considered 1 to be prime, and Derrick Norman Lehmer included 1 in his list of primes less than ten million published in 1914.
Lists of primes that included 1 continued to be published as recently as 1956.
However, by the early 20th century mathematicians began to agree that 1 should not be listed as prime, but rather in its own special category as a "unit".
If 1 were to be considered a prime, many statements involving primes would need to be awkwardly reworded.
For example, the fundamental theorem of arithmetic would need to be rephrased in terms of factorizations into primes greater than 1, because every number would have multiple factorizations with any number of copies of 1.
Similarly, the sieve of Eratosthenes would not work correctly if it handled 1 as a prime, because it would eliminate all multiples of 1 (that is, all other numbers) and output only the single number 1.
Some other more technical properties of prime numbers also do not hold for the number 1: for instance, the formulas for Euler's totient function or for the sum of divisors function are different for prime numbers than they are for 1.
Writing a number as a product of prime numbers is called a prime factorization of the number.
The terms in the product are called prime factors.
The central importance of prime numbers to number theory and mathematics in general stems from the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.
This theorem states that every integer larger than 1 can be written as a product of one or more primes.
More strongly, this product is unique in the sense that any two prime factorizations of the same number will have the same numbers of copies of the same primes, although their ordering may differ.
So, although there are many different ways of finding a factorization using an integer factorization algorithm, they all must produce the same result.
Primes can thus be considered the "basic building blocks" of the natural numbers.
There are infinitely many prime numbers.
This statement is referred to as Euclid's theorem in honor of the ancient Greek mathematician Euclid, since the first known proof for this statement is attributed to him.
Many more proofs of the infinitude of primes are known, including an analytical proof by Euler, Goldbach's proof based on Fermat numbers, Furstenberg's proof using general topology, and Kummer's elegant proof.
Euclid's proof shows that every finite list of primes is incomplete.
Because there is no finite list of all the primes, there must be infinitely many primes.
The numbers formed by adding one to the products of the smallest primes are called Euclid numbers.
There is no known efficient formula for primes.
For example, there is no non-constant polynomial, even in several variables, that takes only prime values.
However, there are numerous expressions that do encode all primes, or only primes.
One possible formula is based on Wilson's theorem and generates the number 2 many times and all other primes exactly once.
There is also a set of Diophantine equations in nine variables and one parameter with the following property: the parameter is prime if and only if the resulting system of equations has a solution over the natural numbers.
This can be used to obtain a single formula with the property that all its positive values are prime.
Other examples of prime-generating formulas come from Mills' theorem and a theorem of Wright.
Many conjectures revolving about primes have been posed.
Often having an elementary formulation, many of these conjectures have withstood proof for decades: all four of Landau's problems from 1912 are still unsolved.
Weaker statements than this have been proven; for example, Vinogradov's theorem says that every sufficiently large odd integer can be written as a sum of three primes.
Chen's theorem says that every sufficiently large even number can be expressed as the sum of a prime and a semiprime (the product of two primes).
Also, any even integer greater than 10 can be written as the sum of six primes.
The branch of number theory studying such questions is called additive number theory.
Another type of problem concerns prime gaps, the differences between consecutive primes.
However, large prime gaps occur much earlier than this argument shows.
It is conjectured that there are infinitely many twin primes, pairs of primes with difference 2; this is the twin prime conjecture.
Their infinitude and density are the subject of the first Hardy–Littlewood conjecture, which can be motivated by the heuristic that the prime numbers behave similarly to a random sequence of numbers with density given by the prime number theorem.
Analytic number theory studies number theory through the lens of continuous functions, limits, infinite series, and the related mathematics of the infinite and infinitesimal.
This area of study began with Leonhard Euler and his first major result, the solution to the Basel problem.
This function is closely connected to the prime numbers and to one of the most significant unsolved problems in mathematics, the Riemann hypothesis.
Although conjectures have been formulated about the proportions of primes in higher-degree polynomials, they remain unproven, and it is unknown whether there exists a quadratic polynomial that (for integer arguments) is prime infinitely often.
The growth rate of this sum is described more precisely by Mertens' second theorem.
Because of Brun's theorem, it is not possible to use Euler's method to solve the twin prime conjecture, that there exist infinitely many twin primes.
An arithmetic progression is a finite or infinite sequence of numbers such that consecutive numbers in the sequence all have the same difference.
This difference is called the modulus of the progression.
In an arithmetic progression, all the numbers have the same remainder when divided by the modulus; in this example, the remainder is 3.
Because both the modulus 9 and the remainder 3 are multiples of 3, so is every element in the sequence.
Therefore, this progression contains only one prime number, 3 itself.
If they are relatively prime, Dirichlet's theorem on arithmetic progressions asserts that the progression contains infinitely many primes.
The Green–Tao theorem shows that there are arbitrarily long finite arithmetic progressions consisting only of primes.
The search for an explanation for this phenomenon led to the deep algebraic number theory of Heegner numbers and the class number problem.
The Hardy–Littlewood conjecture F predicts the density of primes among the values of quadratic polynomials with integer coefficients in terms of the logarithmic integral and the polynomial coefficients.
No quadratic polynomial has been proven to take infinitely many prime values.
The Ulam spiral arranges the natural numbers in a two-dimensional grid, spiraling in concentric squares surrounding the origin with the prime numbers highlighted.
Visually, the primes appear to cluster on certain diagonals and not others, suggesting that some quadratic polynomials take prime values more often than others.
This function is an analytic function on the complex numbers.
This equality between a sum and a product, discovered by Euler, is called an Euler product.
The Euler product can be derived from the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, and shows the close connection between the zeta function and the prime numbers.
The Riemann hypothesis states that the zeros of the zeta-function are all either negative even numbers, or complex numbers with real part equal to 1/2.
The original proof of the prime number theorem was based on a weak form of this hypothesis, that there are no zeros with real part equal to 1, although other more elementary proofs have been found.
The prime-counting function can be expressed by Riemann's explicit formula as a sum in which each term comes from one of the zeros of the zeta function; the main term of this sum is the logarithmic integral, and the remaining terms cause the sum to fluctuate above and below the main term.
In this sense, the zeros control how regularly the prime numbers are distributed.
Modular sums, differences and products are calculated by performing the same replacement by the remainder on the result of the usual sum, difference, or product of integers.
In this system of numbers, division by all nonzero numbers is possible if and only if the modulus is prime.
However, with the composite modulus 6, division by 3 is impossible.
In the terminology of abstract algebra, the ability to perform division means that modular arithmetic modulo a prime number forms a field or, more specifically, a finite field, while other moduli only give a ring but not a field.
Several theorems about primes can be formulated using modular arithmetic.
This picture of an order, absolute value, and complete field derived from them can be generalized to algebraic number fields and their valuations (certain mappings from the multiplicative group of the field to a totally ordered additive group, also called orders), absolute values (certain multiplicative mappings from the field to the real numbers, also called norms), and places (extensions to complete fields in which the given field is a dense set, also called completions).
The extension from the rational numbers to the real numbers, for instance, is a place in which the distance between numbers is the usual absolute value of their difference.
The corresponding mapping to an additive group would be the logarithm of the absolute value, although this does not meet all the requirements of a valuation.
The local–global principle allows certain problems over the rational numbers to be solved by piecing together solutions from each of their places, again underlining the importance of primes to number theory.
A commutative ring is an algebraic structure where addition, subtraction and multiplication are defined.
The integers are a ring, and the prime numbers in the integers have been generalized to rings in two different ways, prime elements and irreducible elements.
An element is irreducible if it is neither a unit nor the product of two other non-unit elements.
In an arbitrary ring, all prime elements are irreducible.
The converse does not hold in general, but does hold for unique factorization domains.
The fundamental theorem of arithmetic continues to hold (by definition) in unique factorization domains.
Its prime elements are known as Gaussian primes.
Rational primes (the prime elements in the integers) congruent to 3 mod 4 are Gaussian primes, but rational primes congruent to 1 mod 4 are not.
Not every ring is a unique factorization domain.
In order to extend unique factorization to a larger class of rings, the notion of a number can be replaced with that of an ideal, a subset of the elements of a ring that contains all sums of pairs of its elements, and all products of its elements with ring elements.
Prime ideals, which generalize prime elements in the sense that the principal ideal generated by a prime element is a prime ideal, are an important tool and object of study in commutative algebra, algebraic number theory and algebraic geometry.
The fundamental theorem of arithmetic generalizes to the Lasker–Noether theorem, which expresses every ideal in a Noetherian commutative ring as an intersection of primary ideals, which are the appropriate generalizations of prime powers.
The spectrum of a ring is a geometric space whose points are the prime ideals of the ring.
Arithmetic geometry also benefits from this notion, and many concepts exist in both geometry and number theory.
For example, factorization or ramification of prime ideals when lifted to an extension field, a basic problem of algebraic number theory, bears some resemblance with ramification in geometry.
These concepts can even assist with in number-theoretic questions solely concerned with integers.
For example, prime ideals in the ring of integers of quadratic number fields can be used in proving quadratic reciprocity, a statement that concerns the existence of square roots modulo integer prime numbers.
Early attempts to prove Fermat's Last Theorem led to Kummer's introduction of regular primes, integer prime numbers connected with the failure of unique factorization in the cyclotomic integers.
The question of how many integer prime numbers factor into a product of multiple prime ideals in an algebraic number field is addressed by Chebotarev's density theorem, which (when applied to the cyclotomic integers) has Dirichlet's theorem on primes in arithmetic progressions as a special case.
For a long time, number theory in general, and the study of prime numbers in particular, was seen as the canonical example of pure mathematics, with no applications outside of mathematics other than the use of prime numbered gear teeth to distribute wear evenly.
In particular, number theorists such as British mathematician G.
Hardy prided themselves on doing work that had absolutely no military significance.
This vision of the purity of number theory was shattered in the 1970s, when it was publicly announced that prime numbers could be used as the basis for the creation of public-key cryptography algorithms.
These applications have led to significant study of algorithms for computing with prime numbers, and in particular of primality testing, methods for determining whether a given number is prime.
The most basic primality testing routine, trial division, is too slow to be useful for large numbers.
One group of modern primality tests is applicable to arbitrary numbers, while more efficient tests are available for numbers of special types.
Most primality tests only tell whether their argument is prime or not.
Routines that also provide a prime factor of composite arguments (or all of its prime factors) are called factorization algorithms.
Prime numbers are also used in computing for checksums, hash tables, and pseudorandom number generators.
Another optimization is to check only primes as factors in this range.
Each division produces a nonzero remainder, so 37 is indeed prime.
Although this method is simple to describe, it is impractical for testing the primality of large integers, because the number of tests that it performs grows exponentially as a function of the number of digits of these integers.
However, trial division is still used, with a smaller limit than the square root on the divisor size, to quickly discover composite numbers with small factors, before using more complicated methods on the numbers that pass this filter.
Before computers, mathematical tables listing all of the primes or prime factorizations up to a given limit were commonly printed.
The oldest known method for generating a list of primes is called the sieve of Eratosthenes.
The animation shows an optimized variant of this method.
Another more asymptotically efficient sieving method for the same problem is the sieve of Atkin.
In advanced mathematics, sieve theory applies similar methods to other problems.
If so, it answers yes and otherwise it answers no.
Because this decreases exponentially with the number of tests, it provides high confidence (although not certainty) that a number that passes the repeated test is prime.
On the other hand, if the test ever fails, then the number is certainly composite.
A composite number that passes such a test is called a pseudoprime.
In contrast, some other algorithms guarantee that their answer will always be correct: primes will always be determined to be prime and composites will always be determined to be composite.
For instance, this is true of trial division.
When the elliptic curve method concludes that a number is prime, it provides primality certificate that can be verified quickly.
The elliptic curve primality test is the fastest in practice of the guaranteed-correct primality tests, but its runtime analysis is based on heuristic arguments rather than rigorous proofs.
The AKS primality test has mathematically proven time complexity, but is slower than elliptic curve primality proving in practice.
These methods can be used to generate large random prime numbers, by generating and testing random numbers until finding one that is prime; when doing this, a faster probabilistic test can quickly eliminate most composite numbers before a guaranteed-correct algorithm is used to verify that the remaining numbers are prime.
The following table lists some of these tests.
In addition to the aforementioned tests that apply to any natural number, some numbers of a special form can be tested for primality more quickly.
For example, the Lucas–Lehmer primality test can determine whether a Mersenne number (one less than a power of two) is prime, deterministically, in the same time as a single iteration of the Miller–Rabin test.
This is why since 1992 (as of October 2024) the largest known prime has always been a Mersenne prime.
It is conjectured that there are infinitely many Mersenne primes.
The following table gives the largest known primes of various types.
Some of these primes have been found using distributed computing.
In 2009, the Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search project was awarded a US$100,000 prize for first discovering a prime with at least 10 million digits.
The Electronic Frontier Foundation also offers $150,000 and $250,000 for primes with at least 100 million digits and 1 billion digits, respectively.
It is significantly more difficult than primality testing, and although many factorization algorithms are known, they are slower than the fastest primality testing methods.
Methods suitable for arbitrary large numbers that do not depend on the size of its factors include the quadratic sieve and general number field sieve.
As with primality testing, there are also factorization algorithms that require their input to have a special form, including the special number field sieve.
As of December 2019 the largest number known to have been factored by a general-purpose algorithm is RSA-240, which has 240 decimal digits (795 bits) and is the product of two large primes.
Shor's algorithm can factor any integer in a polynomial number of steps on a quantum computer.
However, current technology can only run this algorithm for very small numbers.
As of October 2012, the largest number that has been factored by a quantum computer running Shor's algorithm is 21.
Several public-key cryptography algorithms, such as RSA and the Diffie–Hellman key exchange, are based on large prime numbers (2048-bit primes are common).
Prime numbers are frequently used for hash tables.
For instance the original method of Carter and Wegman for universal hashing was based on computing hash functions by choosing random linear functions modulo large prime numbers.
As well as in the hash function, prime numbers are used for the hash table size in quadratic probing based hash tables to ensure that the probe sequence covers the whole table.
Some checksum methods are based on the mathematics of prime numbers.
For instance the checksums used in International Standard Book Numbers are defined by taking the rest of the number modulo 11, a prime number.
Because 11 is prime this method can detect both single-digit errors and transpositions of adjacent digits.
Prime numbers are also used in pseudorandom number generators including linear congruential generators and the Mersenne Twister.
Prime numbers are of central importance to number theory but also have many applications to other areas within mathematics, including abstract algebra and elementary geometry.
For example, it is possible to place prime numbers of points in a two-dimensional grid so that no three are in a line, or so that every triangle formed by three of the points has large area.
Another example is Eisenstein's criterion, a test for whether a polynomial is irreducible based on divisibility of its coefficients by a prime number and its square.
The concept of a prime number is so important that it has been generalized in different ways in various branches of mathematics.
Generally, "prime" indicates minimality or indecomposability, in an appropriate sense.
For example, the prime field of a given field is its smallest subfield that contains both 0 and 1.
It is either the field of rational numbers or a finite field with a prime number of elements, whence the name.
Often a second, additional meaning is intended by using the word prime, namely that any object can be, essentially uniquely, decomposed into its prime components.
For example, in knot theory, a prime knot is a knot that is indecomposable in the sense that it cannot be written as the connected sum of two nontrivial knots.
Any knot can be uniquely expressed as a connected sum of prime knots.
The prime decomposition of 3-manifolds is another example of this type.
Beyond mathematics and computing, prime numbers have potential connections to quantum mechanics, and have been used metaphorically in the arts and literature.
They have also been used in evolutionary biology to explain the life cycles of cicadas.
They are named after Pierre de Fermat, who conjectured that all such numbers are prime.
Beginning with the work of Hugh Montgomery and Freeman Dyson in the 1970s, mathematicians and physicists have speculated that the zeros of the Riemann zeta function are connected to the energy levels of quantum systems.
Prime numbers are also significant in quantum information science, thanks to mathematical structures such as mutually unbiased bases and symmetric informationally complete positive-operator-valued measures.
The evolutionary strategy used by cicadas of the genus Magicicada makes use of prime numbers.
These insects spend most of their lives as grubs underground.
They only pupate and then emerge from their burrows after 7, 13 or 17 years, at which point they fly about, breed, and then die after a few weeks at most.
Biologists theorize that these prime-numbered breeding cycle lengths have evolved in order to prevent predators from synchronizing with these cycles.
In contrast, the multi-year periods between flowering in bamboo plants are hypothesized to be smooth numbers, having only small prime numbers in their factorizations.
Prime numbers have influenced many artists and writers.
The French composer Olivier Messiaen used prime numbers to create ametrical music through "natural phenomena".
In works such as La Nativité du Seigneur (1935) and Quatre études de rythme (1949–1950), he simultaneously employs motifs with lengths given by different prime numbers to create unpredictable rhythms: the primes 41, 43, 47 and 53 appear in the third étude, "Neumes rythmiques".
According to Messiaen this way of composing was "inspired by the movements of nature, movements of free and unequal durations".
In his science fiction novel Contact, scientist Carl Sagan suggested that prime factorization could be used as a means of establishing two-dimensional image planes in communications with aliens, an idea that he had first developed informally with American astronomer Frank Drake in 1975.
In the novel The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time by Mark Haddon, the narrator arranges the sections of the story by consecutive prime numbers as a way to convey the mental state of its main character, a mathematically gifted teen with Asperger syndrome.
Prime numbers are used as a metaphor for loneliness and isolation in the Paolo Giordano novel The Solitude of Prime Numbers, in which they are portrayed as "outsiders" among integers.
Encyclopedia of Mathematics.
Caldwell, Chris, The Prime Pages at primes.
Prime Numbers on In Our Time at the BBC.
Prime factors calculator can factorize any positive integer up to 20 digits.
Fast Online primality test with factorization makes use of the Elliptic Curve Method (up to thousand-digits numbers, requires Java).
Huge database of prime numbers.
Prime Numbers up to 1 trillion.
Archived 2021-02-27 at the Wayback Machine.
In mathematics, the Riemann hypothesis is the conjecture that the Riemann zeta function has its zeros only at the negative even integers and complex numbers with real part ⁠1/2⁠.
Many consider it to be the most important unsolved problem in pure mathematics.
It is of great interest in number theory because it implies results about the distribution of prime numbers.
It was proposed by Bernhard Riemann, after whom it is named.
According to a 2026 survey, there is overwhelming numerical evidence for the hypothesis, but no proof is known.
The Riemann hypothesis and some of its generalizations, along with Goldbach's conjecture and the twin prime conjecture, make up Hilbert's eighth problem in David Hilbert's list of twenty-three unsolved problems; it is also one of the Millennium Prize Problems of the Clay Mathematics Institute, which offers US$1 million for a solution to any of them.
The name is also used for some closely related analogues, some of which have been proved, such as the Riemann hypothesis for curves over finite fields, which was proved by André Weil.
These are called its trivial zeros.
The Riemann hypothesis discusses zeros outside the region of convergence of this series and Euler product.
Because the zeta function is meromorphic, all choices of how to perform this analytic continuation will lead to the same result, by the identity theorem.
Hiervon wäre allerdings ein strenger Beweis zu wünschen; ich habe indess die Aufsuchung desselben nach einigen flüchtigen vergeblichen Versuchen vorläufig bei Seite gelassen, da er für den nächsten Zweck meiner Untersuchung entbehrlich schien.
Of course one would wish for a rigorous proof here; I have for the time being, after some fleeting vain attempts, provisionally put aside the search for this, as it appears dispensable for the immediate objective of my investigation.
At the death of Riemann, a note was found among his papers, saying "These properties of ζ(s) (the function in question) are deduced from an expression of it which, however, I did not succeed in simplifying enough to publish it.
We still have not the slightest idea of what the expression could be.
As to the properties he simply enunciated, some thirty years elapsed before I was able to prove all of them but one [the Riemann Hypothesis itself].
For some graphs of the sums of the first few terms of this series see Riesel & Göhl (1970) or Zagier (1977).
This formula says that the zeros of the Riemann zeta function control the oscillations of primes around their "expected" positions.
The result has caught the imagination of most mathematicians because it is so unexpected, connecting two seemingly unrelated areas in mathematics; namely, number theory, which is the study of the discrete, and complex analysis, which deals with continuous processes.
The practical uses of the Riemann hypothesis include many propositions known to be true under the Riemann hypothesis, and some that can be shown to be equivalent to the Riemann hypothesis.
Riemann's explicit formula for the number of primes less than a given number states that, in terms of a sum over the zeros of the Riemann zeta function, the magnitude of the oscillations of primes around their expected position is controlled by the real parts of the zeros of the zeta function.
In particular, the error term in the prime number theorem is closely related to the position of the zeros.
Helge von Koch proved that the Riemann hypothesis implies the "best possible" bound for the error of the prime number theorem.
This is an explicit version of a theorem of Cramér.
The Riemann hypothesis implies strong bounds on the growth of many other arithmetic functions, in addition to the primes counting function above.
One example involves the Möbius function μ.
Littlewood, 1912; see for instance: paragraph 14.
The determinant of the order n Redheffer matrix is equal to M(n), so the Riemann hypothesis can also be stated as a condition on the growth of these determinants.
Littlewood's result has been improved several times since then, by Edmund Landau, Edward Charles Titchmarsh, Helmut Maier and Hugh Montgomery, and Kannan Soundararajan.
The Riemann hypothesis is equivalent to many other conjectures about the rate of growth of other arithmetic functions aside from μ(n).
Another example was found by Jérôme Franel, and extended by Landau (see Franel & Landau (1924)).
The Riemann hypothesis is equivalent to several statements showing that the terms of the Farey sequence are fairly regular.
The Riemann hypothesis also implies quite sharp bounds for the growth rate of the zeta function in other regions of the critical strip.
The prime number theorem implies that on average, the gap between the prime p and its successor is log p.
However, some gaps between primes may be much larger than the average.
Cramér proved that, assuming the Riemann hypothesis, every gap is O(√p log p).
This is a case in which even the best bound that can be proved using the Riemann hypothesis is far weaker than what seems true: Cramér's conjecture implies that every gap is O((log p)2), which, while larger than the average gap, is far smaller than the bound implied by the Riemann hypothesis.
Numerical evidence supports Cramér's conjecture.
Many statements equivalent to the Riemann hypothesis have been found, though so far none of them have led to much progress in proving (or disproving) it.
Some typical examples are as follows.
See also the Hardy–Littlewood criterion.
Beurling (1955) extended this by showing that the zeta function has no zeros with real part greater than 1/p if and only if this function space is dense in Lp(0,1).
Weil's criterion is the statement that the positivity of a certain function is equivalent to the Riemann hypothesis.
Related is Li's criterion, a statement that the positivity of a certain sequence of numbers is equivalent to the Riemann hypothesis.
That ζ(s) has only simple zeros on the critical line is equivalent to its derivative having no zeros on the critical line.
The Farey sequence provides two equivalences, due to Jerome Franel and Edmund Landau in 1924.
The de Bruijn–Newman constant denoted by Λ and named after Nicolaas Govert de Bruijn and Charles M.
Since the Riemann hypothesis is equivalent to the claim that all the zeroes of H(0, z) are real, the Riemann hypothesis is equivalent to the conjecture that Λ ≤ 0.
Brad Rodgers and Terence Tao discovered the equivalence is actually Λ = 0 by proving zero to be the lower bound of the constant.
Proving zero is also the upper bound would therefore prove the Riemann hypothesis.
Newman noted that this conjecture (now theorem) "is a quantitative version of the dictum that the Riemann hypothesis, if true, is only barely so.
Several applications use the generalized Riemann hypothesis for Dirichlet L-series or zeta functions of number fields rather than just the Riemann hypothesis.
Many basic properties of the Riemann zeta function can easily be generalized to all Dirichlet L-series, so it is plausible that a method that proves the Riemann hypothesis for the Riemann zeta function would also work for the generalized Riemann hypothesis for Dirichlet L-functions.
Several results first proved using the generalized Riemann hypothesis were later given unconditional proofs without using it, though these were usually much harder.
Many of the consequences on the following list are taken from Conrad (2010).
In 1913, Grönwall showed that the generalized Riemann hypothesis implies that Gauss's list of imaginary quadratic fields with class number 1 is complete, though Baker, Stark and Heegner later gave unconditional proofs of this without using the generalized Riemann hypothesis.
In 1923, Hardy and Littlewood showed that the generalized Riemann hypothesis implies a weak form of the Goldbach conjecture for odd numbers: that every sufficiently large odd number is the sum of three primes, though in 1937 Vinogradov gave an unconditional proof.
In 1997 Deshouillers, Effinger, te Riele, and Zinoviev showed that the generalized Riemann hypothesis implies that every odd number greater than 5 is the sum of three primes.
In 2013 Harald Helfgott proved the ternary Goldbach conjecture without the GRH dependence, subject to some extensive calculations completed with the help of David J.
In 1934, Chowla showed that the generalized Riemann hypothesis implies that the first prime in the arithmetic progression a mod m is at most Km2log(m)2 for some fixed constant K.
In 1967, Hooley showed that the generalized Riemann hypothesis implies Artin's conjecture on primitive roots.
In 1973, Weinberger showed that the generalized Riemann hypothesis implies that Euler's list of idoneal numbers is complete.
Weinberger (1973) showed that the generalized Riemann hypothesis for the zeta functions of all algebraic number fields implies that any number field with class number 1 is either Euclidean or an imaginary quadratic number field of discriminant −19, −43, −67, or −163.
Miller showed that the generalized Riemann hypothesis implies that one can test if a number is prime in polynomial time via the Miller test.
In 2002, Manindra Agrawal, Neeraj Kayal and Nitin Saxena proved this result unconditionally using the AKS primality test.
Odlyzko (1990) discussed how the generalized Riemann hypothesis can be used to give sharper estimates for discriminants and class numbers of number fields.
Ono & Soundararajan (1997) showed that the generalized Riemann hypothesis implies that Ramanujan's integral quadratic form x2 + y2 + 10z2 represents all integers that it represents locally, with exactly 18 exceptions.
In 2021, Alexander (Alex) Dunn and Maksym Radziwill proved Patterson's conjecture on cubic Gauss sums, under the assumption of the GRH.
Some consequences of the RH are also consequences of its negation, and are thus theorems.
In their discussion of the Hecke, Deuring, Mordell, Heilbronn theorem, Ireland & Rosen (1990, p.
The method of proof here is truly amazing.
If the generalized Riemann hypothesis is true, then the theorem is true.
If the generalized Riemann hypothesis is false, then the theorem is true.
Thus, the theorem is true!
Care should be taken to understand what is meant by saying the generalized Riemann hypothesis is false: one should specify exactly which class of Dirichlet series has a counterexample.
This concerns the sign of the error in the prime number theorem.
It has been computed that π(x) < li(x) for all x ≤ 1025 (see this table), and no value of x is known for which π(x) > li(x).
Thus the difference π(x) − li(x) changes sign infinitely many times.
Skewes' number is an estimate of the value of x corresponding to the first sign change.
Littlewood's proof is divided into two cases: the RH is assumed false (about half a page of Ingham 1932, Chapt.
V), and the RH is assumed true (about a dozen pages).
This is the conjecture (first stated in article 303 of Gauss's Disquisitiones Arithmeticae) that there are only finitely many imaginary quadratic fields with a given class number.
One way to prove it would be to show that as the discriminant D → −∞ the class number h(D) → ∞.
The following sequence of theorems involving the Riemann hypothesis is described in Ireland & Rosen 1990, pp.
In 1935, Carl Siegel strengthened the result without using RH or GRH in any way.
Ribenboim remarks that: "The method of proof is interesting, in that the inequality is shown first under the assumption that the Riemann hypothesis is true, secondly under the contrary assumption.
The Riemann hypothesis can be generalized by replacing the Riemann zeta function by the formally similar, but much more general, global L-functions.
In this broader setting, one expects the non-trivial zeros of the global L-functions to have real part 1/2.
It is these conjectures, rather than the classical Riemann hypothesis only for the single Riemann zeta function, which account for the true importance of the Riemann hypothesis in mathematics.
The most common generalized Riemann hypothesis extends the Riemann hypothesis to all Dirichlet L-functions.
In particular it implies the conjecture that Siegel zeros (zeros of L-functions between 1/2 and 1) do not exist.
The extended Riemann hypothesis extends the Riemann hypothesis to all Dedekind zeta functions of algebraic number fields.
Since Dedekind zeta function for abelian extension of the rationals can be expressed as product of Dirichlet L-functions and only possible pole is in 1 for Riemann zeta function (thus no pole can cancel nontrivial zero), this version of Riemann hypothesis implies generalized Riemann hypothesis.
The Riemann hypothesis can also be extended to the L-functions of Hecke characters of number fields.
Since Dirichlet L-functions are Hecke L-functions for finite characters, then this hypothesis directly implies generalized Riemann hypothesis.
Dedekind zeta functions can be expressed as product of Hecke L-functions and only possible pole of Hecke L-function is at 1, then this version of Riemann Hypothesis implies also version for Dedekind zeta functions.
There are two approaches for extension of Riemann hypothesis that seem to be the most general.
The grand Riemann hypothesis extends it to all Automorphic L-functions, such as Mellin transforms of Hecke eigenforms.
The Riemann hypothesis for Selberg class extends it rather for functions satisfying some properties (at least conjecturaly satisfied by most functions usually called zeta functions or L-functions) than for functions defined by direct formula.
Though it is expected that Selberg class should be equal to class of automorphic L-functions, and thus this approaches should be equivalent, this is important open problem itself and part of Langlands program.
Artin (1924) introduced global zeta functions of (quadratic) function fields and conjectured an analogue of the Riemann hypothesis for them, which has been proved by Hasse in the genus 1 case and by Weil (1948) in general.
This led Weil (1949) to conjecture a similar statement for all algebraic varieties; the resulting Weil conjectures were proved by Pierre Deligne.
Arithmetic zeta functions generalise the Riemann and Dedekind zeta functions as well as the zeta functions of varieties over finite fields to every arithmetic scheme or a scheme of finite type over integers.
The arithmetic zeta function of a regular connected equidimensional arithmetic scheme of Kronecker dimension n can be factorized into the product of appropriately defined L-factors and an auxiliary factor.
This is known for schemes in positive characteristic and follows from Pierre Deligne, but remains entirely unknown in characteristic zero.
Selberg (1956) introduced the Selberg zeta function of a Riemann surface.
These are similar to the Riemann zeta function: they have a functional equation, and an infinite product similar to the Euler product but taken over closed geodesics rather than primes.
The Selberg trace formula is the analogue for these functions of the explicit formulas in prime number theory.
Selberg proved that the Selberg zeta functions satisfy the analogue of the Riemann hypothesis, with the imaginary parts of their zeros related to the eigenvalues of the Laplacian operator of the Riemann surface.
The Ihara zeta function of a finite graph is an analogue of the Selberg zeta function, which was first introduced by Yasutaka Ihara in the context of discrete subgroups of the two-by-two p-adic special linear group.
A regular finite graph is a Ramanujan graph, a mathematical model of efficient communication networks, if and only if its Ihara zeta function satisfies the analogue of the Riemann hypothesis as was pointed out by T.
Montgomery (1973) suggested the pair correlation conjecture that the correlation functions of the (suitably normalized) zeros of the zeta function should be the same as those of the eigenvalues of a random hermitian matrix.
Odlyzko (1987) showed that this is supported by large-scale numerical calculations of these correlation functions.
Montgomery showed that (assuming the Riemann hypothesis) at least 2/3 of all zeros are simple, and a related conjecture is that all zeros of the zeta function are simple (or more generally have no non-trivial integer linear relations between their imaginary parts).
Dedekind zeta functions of algebraic number fields, which generalize the Riemann zeta function, often do have multiple complex zeros.
This is because the Dedekind zeta functions factorize as a product of powers of Artin L-functions, so zeros of Artin L-functions sometimes give rise to multiple zeros of Dedekind zeta functions.
Other examples of zeta functions with multiple zeros are the L-functions of some elliptic curves: these can have multiple zeros at the real point of their critical line; the Birch-Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture predicts that the multiplicity of this zero is the rank of the elliptic curve.
There are many other examples of zeta functions with analogues of the Riemann hypothesis, some of which have been proved.
Goss zeta functions of function fields have a Riemann hypothesis, proved by Sheats (1998).
The main conjecture of Iwasawa theory, proved by Barry Mazur and Andrew Wiles for cyclotomic fields, and Wiles for totally real fields, identifies the zeros of a p-adic L-function with the eigenvalues of an operator, so can be thought of as an analogue of the Hilbert–Pólya conjecture for p-adic L-functions.
Several mathematicians have addressed the Riemann hypothesis, but none of their attempts has yet been accepted as a proof.
Watkins (2021) lists some incorrect solutions.
Hilbert and Pólya suggested that one way to derive the Riemann hypothesis would be to find a self-adjoint operator, from the existence of which the statement on the real parts of the zeros of ζ(s) would follow when one applies the criterion on real eigenvalues.
Some support for this idea comes from several analogues of the Riemann zeta functions whose zeros correspond to eigenvalues of some operator: the zeros of a zeta function of a variety over a finite field correspond to eigenvalues of a Frobenius element on an étale cohomology group, the zeros of a Selberg zeta function are eigenvalues of a Laplacian operator of a Riemann surface, and the zeros of a p-adic zeta function correspond to eigenvectors of a Galois action on ideal class groups.
Odlyzko (1987) showed that the distribution of the zeros of the Riemann zeta function shares some statistical properties with the eigenvalues of random matrices drawn from the Gaussian unitary ensemble.
This gives some support to the Hilbert–Pólya conjecture.
The crucial point is that the Hamiltonian should be a self-adjoint operator so that the quantization would be a realization of the Hilbert–Pólya program.
This yields a Hamiltonian whose eigenvalues are the square of the imaginary part of the Riemann zeros, and also that the functional determinant of this Hamiltonian operator is just the Riemann Xi function.
However this operator is not useful in practice since it includes the inverse function (implicit function) of the potential but not the potential itself.
The analogy with the Riemann hypothesis over finite fields suggests that the Hilbert space containing eigenvectors corresponding to the zeros might be some sort of first cohomology group of the spectrum Spec (Z) of the integers.
Deninger (1998) described some of the attempts to find such a cohomology theory.
Zagier (1981) constructed a natural space of invariant functions on the upper half plane that has eigenvalues under the Laplacian operator that correspond to zeros of the Riemann zeta function—and remarked that in the unlikely event that one could show the existence of a suitable positive definite inner product on this space, the Riemann hypothesis would follow.
Cartier (1982) discussed a related example, where due to a bizarre bug a computer program listed zeros of the Riemann zeta function as eigenvalues of the same Laplacian operator.
Schumayer & Hutchinson (2011) surveyed some of the attempts to construct a suitable physical model related to the Riemann zeta function.
The Lee–Yang theorem states that the zeros of certain partition functions in statistical mechanics all lie on a "critical line" with their real part equal to 0, and this has led to some speculation about a relationship with the Riemann hypothesis.
He showed that this in turn would imply that the Riemann hypothesis is true.
But Haselgrove (1958) proved that T(x) is negative for infinitely many x (and also disproved the closely related Pólya conjecture), and Borwein, Ferguson & Mossinghoff (2008) showed that the smallest such x is 72185376951205.
Spira (1968) showed by numerical calculation that the finite Dirichlet series above for N = 19 has a zero with real part greater than 1.
Turán also showed that a somewhat weaker assumption, the nonexistence of zeros with real part greater than 1 + N−1/2+ε for large N in the finite Dirichlet series above, would also imply the Riemann hypothesis, but Montgomery (1983) showed that for all sufficiently large N these series have zeros with real part greater than 1 + (log log N)/(4 log N).
Therefore, Turán's result is vacuously true and cannot help prove the Riemann hypothesis.
Alain Connes has described a relationship between the Riemann hypothesis and noncommutative geometry, and showed that a suitable analog of the Selberg trace formula for the action of the idèle class group on the adèle class space would imply the Riemann hypothesis.
Some of these ideas are elaborated in Lapidus (2008).
Louis de Branges showed that the Riemann hypothesis would follow from a positivity condition on a certain Hilbert space of entire functions.
However Conrey & Li (2000) showed that the necessary positivity conditions are not satisfied.
Despite this obstacle, de Branges has continued to work on an attempted proof of the Riemann hypothesis along the same lines, but this has not been widely accepted by other mathematicians.
The Riemann hypothesis implies that the zeros of the zeta function form a quasicrystal, a distribution with discrete support whose Fourier transform also has discrete support.
Dyson (2009) suggested trying to prove the Riemann hypothesis by classifying, or at least studying, 1-dimensional quasicrystals.
When one goes from geometric dimension one, e.
In dimension one the study of the zeta integral in Tate's thesis does not lead to new important information on the Riemann hypothesis.
Contrary to this, in dimension two work of Ivan Fesenko on two-dimensional generalisation of Tate's thesis includes an integral representation of a zeta integral closely related to the zeta function.
In this new situation, not possible in dimension one, the poles of the zeta function can be studied via the zeta integral and associated adele groups.
Related conjecture of Ivan Fesenko on the positivity of the fourth derivative of a boundary function associated to the zeta integral essentially implies the pole part of the generalized Riemann hypothesis.
Suzuki (2011) proved that the latter, together with some technical assumptions, implies Fesenko's conjecture.
Deligne's proof of the Riemann hypothesis over finite fields used the zeta functions of product varieties, whose zeros and poles correspond to sums of zeros and poles of the original zeta function, in order to bound the real parts of the zeros of the original zeta function.
By analogy, Kurokawa (1992) introduced multiple zeta functions whose zeros and poles correspond to sums of zeros and poles of the Riemann zeta function.
To make the series converge he restricted to sums of zeros or poles all with non-negative imaginary part.
So far, the known bounds on the zeros and poles of the multiple zeta functions are not strong enough to give useful estimates for the zeros of the Riemann zeta function.
So the density of zeros with imaginary part near T is about log(T)/(2π), and the function S describes the small deviations from this.
The function S(t) jumps by 1 at each zero of the zeta function, and for t ≥ 8 it decreases monotonically between zeros with derivative close to −log t.
This suggests that S(T)/(log log T)1/2 resembles a Gaussian random variable with mean 0 and variance 2π2 (Ghosh (1983) proved this fact).
In particular |S(T)| is usually somewhere around (log log T)1/2, but occasionally much larger.
The exact order of growth of S(T) is not known.
There has been no unconditional improvement to Riemann's original bound S(T) = O(log T), though the Riemann hypothesis implies the slightly smaller bound S(T) = O(log T/log log T).
The true order of magnitude may be somewhat less than this, as random functions with the same distribution as S(T) tend to have growth of order about log(T)1/2.
In the other direction it cannot be too small: Selberg (1946) showed that S(T) ≠ o((log T)1/3/(log log T)7/3), and assuming the Riemann hypothesis Montgomery showed that S(T) ≠ o((log T)1/2/(log log T)1/2).
Numerical calculations confirm that S grows very slowly: |S(T)| < 1 for T < 280, |S(T)| < 2 for T < 6800000, and the largest value of |S(T)| found so far is not much larger than 3.
Riemann's estimate S(T) = O(log T) implies that the gaps between zeros are bounded, and Littlewood improved this slightly, showing that the gaps between their imaginary parts tend to 0.
Hadamard (1896) and de la Vallée-Poussin (1896) independently proved that no zeros could lie on the line Re(s) = 1.
Together with the functional equation and the fact that there are no zeros with real part greater than 1, this showed that all non-trivial zeros must lie in the interior of the critical strip 0 < Re(s) < 1.
This was a key step in their first proofs of the prime number theorem.
Both the original proofs that the zeta function has no zeros with real part 1 are similar, and depend on showing that if ζ(1 + it) vanishes, then ζ(1 + 2it) is singular, which is not possible.
The most extensive computer search by Platt and Trudgian for counterexamples of the Riemann hypothesis has verified it for |t| ≤ 3.
Beyond that zero-free regions are known as inequalities concerning σ + i t, which can be zeroes.
The oldest version is from De la Vallée-Poussin (1899–1900), who proved there is a region without zeroes that satisfies 1 − σ ≥ ⁠C/log(t)⁠ for some positive constant C.
In other words, zeros cannot be too close to the line σ = 1: there is a zero-free region close to this line.
This has been enlarged by several authors using methods such as Vinogradov's mean-value theorem.
Hardy (1914) and Hardy & Littlewood (1921) showed there are infinitely many zeros on the critical line, by considering moments of certain functions related to the zeta function.
Selberg (1942) proved that at least a (small) positive proportion of zeros lie on the line.
Levinson (1974) improved this to one-third of the zeros by relating the zeros of the zeta function to those of its derivative, and Conrey (1989) improved this further to two-fifths.
In 2020, this estimate was extended to five-twelfths by Pratt, Robles, Zaharescu and Zeindler by considering extended mollifiers that can accommodate higher order derivatives of the zeta function and their associated Kloosterman sums.
Most zeros lie close to the critical line.
Ivić (1985) gives several more precise versions of this result, called zero density estimates, which bound the number of zeros in regions with imaginary part at most T and real part at least 1/2 + ε.
Anatoly Karatsuba proved that for a fixed ε satisfying the condition 0 < ε < 0.
The estimates of Selberg and Karatsuba can not be improved in respect of the order of growth as T → ∞.
The Karatsuba method permits to investigate zeros of the Riemann zeta function on "supershort" intervals of the critical line, that is, on the intervals (T, T+H], the length H of which grows slower than any, even arbitrarily small degree T.
This estimate is quite close to the one that follows from the Riemann hypothesis.
By finding many intervals where the function Z changes sign one can show that there are many zeros on the critical line.
To verify the Riemann hypothesis up to a given imaginary part T of the zeros, one also has to check that there are no further zeros off the line in this region.
This can be done by calculating the total number of zeros in the region using Turing's method and checking that it is the same as the number of zeros found on the line.
This allows one to verify the Riemann hypothesis computationally up to any desired value of T (provided all the zeros of the zeta function in this region are simple and on the critical line).
Some calculations of zeros of the zeta function are listed below, where the "height" of a zero is the magnitude of its imaginary part, and the height of the nth zero is denoted by γn.
So far all zeros that have been checked are on the critical line and are simple.
A Gram point is a point on the critical line 1/2 + it where the zeta function is real and non-zero.
Using the expression for the zeta function on the critical line, ζ(1/2 + it) = Z(t)e−iθ(t), where Hardy's function, Z, is real for real t, and θ is the Riemann–Siegel theta function, we see that zeta is real when sin(θ(t)) = 0.
This implies that θ(t) is an integer multiple of π, which allows for the location of Gram points to be calculated fairly easily by inverting the formula for θ.
They are usually numbered as gn for n = 0, 1, .
Gram observed that there was often exactly one zero of the zeta function between any two consecutive Gram points; Hutchinson called this observation Gram's law.
There are several other closely related statements that are also sometimes called Gram's law: for example, (−1)nZ(gn) is usually positive, or Z(t) usually has opposite sign at consecutive Gram points.
The first failure of Gram's law occurs at the 127th zero and the Gram point g126, which are in the "wrong" order.
A Gram point t is called good if the zeta function is positive at 1/2 + it.
The indices of the "bad" Gram points where Z has the "wrong" sign are 126, 134, 195, 211, .
A Gram block is an interval bounded by two good Gram points such that all the Gram points between them are bad.
A refinement of Gram's law called Rosser's rule due to Rosser, Yohe & Schoenfeld (1969) says that Gram blocks often have the expected number of zeros in them (the same as the number of Gram intervals), even though some of the individual Gram intervals in the block may not have exactly one zero in them.
For example, the interval bounded by g125 and g127 is a Gram block containing a unique bad Gram point g126, and contains the expected number 2 of zeros although neither of its two Gram intervals contains a unique zero.
Gram's rule and Rosser's rule both say that in some sense zeros do not stray too far from their expected positions.
The distance of a zero from its expected position is controlled by the function S defined above, which grows extremely slowly: its average value is of the order of (log log T)1/2, which only reaches 2 for T around 1024.
This means that both rules hold most of the time for small T but eventually break down often.
Indeed, Trudgian (2011) showed that both Gram's law and Rosser's rule fail in a positive proportion of cases.
To be specific, it is expected that in about 66% one zero is enclosed by two successive Gram points, but in 17% no zero and in 17% two zeros are in such a Gram-interval on the long run Hanga (2020).
Assuming the Riemann hypothesis one can ask what further regularities might govern the distribution of the zeros of the zeta function on the critical line.
One conjectural picture is that the critical zeros of the zeta function behave statistically like the eigenvalues of large random Hermitian matrices.
The idea began with Hugh Montgomery's work on the pair correlation conjecture for the zeros of the zeta function.
After a suitable rescaling to account for the increasing density of zeros with height, the conjectured pair correlation function agrees with that of eigenvalues in the Gaussian unitary ensemble (GUE) in random matrix theory.
The connection was tested numerically by Andrew Odlyzko, who found that the spacing statistics of zeros high on the critical line agree closely with the predictions of GUE random matrix theory.
The agreement extends beyond nearest-neighbor spacings to higher correlation functions, and is widely regarded as strong evidence that the zeros are modeled by the same local statistics as random matrices.
The random matrix analogy is also related to the Hilbert–Pólya conjecture, and to ideas from quantum chaos.
In quantum chaotic systems, eigenvalues often obey random matrix statistics, so the appearance of the same statistics in the zeros of the zeta function can be interpreted as evidence that they may arise from a selfadjoint operator or from a chaotic dynamical system.
This gives a heuristic picture of why the zeros might lie on a spectral line and why their spacings exhibit strong repulsion rather than random clustering.
This viewpoint was adopt by Nicholas Katz and Peter Sarnak, who proposed that families of L-functions have symmetry types governed by the compact classical groups (unitary, orthogonal, or symplectic), and that the distributions of their low-lying zeros should match the corresponding random-matrix ensembles.
For the Riemann zeta function, the relevant ensemble is that of the unitary group.
Random matrix theory has also led to conjectures about the growth of moments of the zeta function on the critical line.
Their conjectures separate a universal random-matrix factor from an arithmetic Euler product factor, and have influenced later work on moments and ratios of L-functions.
Random matrix theory and quantum chaos are thus heuristic framework surrounding the Riemann hypothesis, even though no proof of the hypothesis is known from this approach.
Mathematical papers about the Riemann hypothesis tend to be cautiously noncommittal about its truth.
Of authors who express an opinion, most of them, such as Riemann (1859) and Bombieri (2000), imply that they expect (or at least hope) that it is true.
The few authors who express serious doubt about it include Ivić (2008), who lists some reasons for skepticism, and Littlewood (1962), who flatly states that he believes it false, that there is no evidence for it and no imaginable reason it would be true.
The consensus of the survey articles (Bombieri 2000, Conrey 2003, and Sarnak 2005) is that the evidence for it is strong but not overwhelming, so that while it is probably true there is reasonable doubt.
Several analogues of the Riemann hypothesis have already been proved.
The proof of the Riemann hypothesis for varieties over finite fields by Deligne (1974) is possibly the single strongest theoretical reason in favor of the Riemann hypothesis.
This provides some evidence for the more general conjecture that all zeta functions associated with automorphic forms satisfy a Riemann hypothesis, which includes the classical Riemann hypothesis as a special case.
Similarly Selberg zeta functions satisfy the analogue of the Riemann hypothesis, and are in some ways similar to the Riemann zeta function, having a functional equation and an infinite product expansion analogous to the Euler product expansion.
But there are also some major differences; for example, they are not given by Dirichlet series.
The Riemann hypothesis for the Goss zeta function was proved by Sheats (1998).
In contrast to these positive examples, some Epstein zeta functions do not satisfy the Riemann hypothesis even though they have an infinite number of zeros on the critical line.
These functions are quite similar to the Riemann zeta function, and have a Dirichlet series expansion and a functional equation, but the ones known to fail the Riemann hypothesis do not have an Euler product and are not directly related to automorphic representations.
At first, the numerical verification that many zeros lie on the line seems strong evidence for it.
But analytic number theory has had many conjectures supported by substantial numerical evidence that turned out to be false.
See Skewes number for a notorious example, where the first exception to a plausible conjecture related to the Riemann hypothesis probably occurs around 10316; a counterexample to the Riemann hypothesis with imaginary part this size would be far beyond anything that can currently be computed using a direct approach.
The problem is that the behavior is often influenced by very slowly increasing functions such as log log T, that tend to infinity, but do so so slowly that this cannot be detected by computation.
Such functions occur in the theory of the zeta function controlling the behavior of its zeros; for example the function S(T) above has average size around (log log T)1/2.
As S(T) jumps by at least 2 at any counterexample to the Riemann hypothesis, one might expect any counterexamples to the Riemann hypothesis to start appearing only when S(T) becomes large.
It is never much more than 3 as far as it has been calculated, but is known to be unbounded, suggesting that calculations may not have yet reached the region of typical behavior of the zeta function.
The Riemann hypothesis is equivalent to this bound for the Möbius function μ and the Mertens function M derived in the same way from it.
In other words, the Riemann hypothesis is in some sense equivalent to saying that μ(x) behaves like a random sequence of coin tosses.
When μ(x) is nonzero its sign gives the parity of the number of prime factors of x, so informally the Riemann hypothesis says that the parity of the number of prime factors of an integer behaves randomly.
Such probabilistic arguments in number theory often give the right answer, but tend to be very hard to make rigorous, and occasionally give the wrong answer for some results, such as Maier's theorem.
The calculations in Odlyzko (1987) show that the zeros of the zeta function behave very much like the eigenvalues of a random Hermitian matrix, suggesting that they are the eigenvalues of some self-adjoint operator, which would imply the Riemann hypothesis.
All attempts to find such an operator have failed.
There are several theorems, such as Goldbach's weak conjecture for sufficiently large odd numbers, that were first proved using the generalized Riemann hypothesis, and later shown to be true unconditionally.
This could be considered as weak evidence for the generalized Riemann hypothesis, as several of its "predictions" are true.
Lehmer's phenomenon, where two zeros are sometimes very close, is sometimes given as a reason to disbelieve the Riemann hypothesis.
But one would expect this to happen occasionally by chance even if the Riemann hypothesis is true, and Odlyzko's calculations suggest that nearby pairs of zeros occur just as often as predicted by Montgomery's conjecture.
Patterson suggests that the most compelling reason for the Riemann hypothesis for most mathematicians is the hope that primes are distributed as regularly as possible.
Sabbagh, Karl (2003b), Dr.
In Pursuit of Zeta-3: The World's Most Mysterious Unsolved Math Problem.
Princeton University Press.
Note: Derbyshire 2003, Rockmore 2005, Sabbagh 2003a, Sabbagh 2003b, Sautoy 2003, and Watkins 2015 are non-technical.
Edwards 1974, Patterson 1988, Borwein/Choi/Rooney/Weirathmueller 2008, Mazur/Stein 2015, Broughan 2017, and Nahin 2021 give mathematical introductions.
Titchmarsh 1986, Ivić 1985, and Karatsuba/Voronin 1992 are advanced monographs.
Apostol, Tom, Where are the zeros of zeta of s?
Poem about the Riemann hypothesis, sung by John Derbyshire.
Gourdon, Xavier; Sebah, Pascal (2004), Computation of zeros of the Zeta function (Reviews the GUE hypothesis, provides an extensive bibliography as well).
Pegg, Ed (2004), Ten Trillion Zeta Zeros, Math Games website, archived from the original on 2004-11-02, retrieved 2004-10-20.
Rubinstein, Michael, algorithm for generating the zeros, archived from the original on 2007-04-27.
In mathematics and computer science, an algorithm ( ) is a finite sequence of mathematically rigorous instructions, typically used to solve a class of specific problems or to perform a computation.
Algorithms are used as specifications for performing calculations and data processing.
More advanced algorithms can use conditionals to divert the code execution through various routes (referred to as automated decision-making) and deduce valid inferences (referred to as automated reasoning).
In contrast, a heuristic is an approach to solving problems without well-defined correct or optimal results.
For example, although social media recommender systems are commonly called "algorithms", they actually rely on heuristics as there is no truly "correct" recommendation.
As an effective method, an algorithm can be expressed within a finite amount of space and time and in a well-defined formal language for calculating a function.
Starting from an initial state and input, a computation occurs at each step, eventually producing output and terminating.
The transition between states can be non-deterministic; randomized algorithms incorporate random input.
Around 825 AD, Persian scientist and polymath Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī wrote kitāb al-ḥisāb al-hindī ("Book of Indian computation") and kitab al-jam' wa'l-tafriq al-ḥisāb al-hindī ("Addition and subtraction in Indian arithmetic").
In the early 12th century, Latin translations of these texts involving the Hindu–Arabic numeral system and arithmetic appeared, for example Liber Alghoarismi de practica arismetrice, attributed to John of Seville, and Liber Algoritmi de numero Indorum, attributed to Adelard of Bath.
Here, alghoarismi or algoritmi is the Latinization of Al-Khwarizmi's name; the text starts with the phrase Dixit Algoritmi, or "Thus spoke Al-Khwarizmi".
The word algorism in English came to mean the use of place-value notation in calculations; it occurs in the Ancrene Wisse from circa 1225.
By the time Geoffrey Chaucer wrote The Canterbury Tales in the late 14th century, he used a variant of the same word in describing augrym stones, stones used for place-value calculation.
In the 15th century, under the influence of the Greek word ἀριθμός (arithmos, "number"; cf.
By 1596, this form of the word was used in English, as algorithm, by Thomas Hood.
In general, a program is an algorithm only if it stops eventually.
Formally, algorithm is an explicit set of instructions to produce an output, that can be followed by a computer or a human performing specific operations on symbols.
Step-by-step procedures for solving mathematical problems have been recorded since antiquity.
This includes in Babylonian mathematics (around 2500 BC), Egyptian mathematics (around 1550 BC), Indian mathematics (around 800 BC and later), the Ifa Oracle (around 500 BC), Greek mathematics (around 240 BC), Chinese mathematics (around 200 BC and later), and Arabic mathematics (around 800 AD).
The earliest evidence of algorithms is found in ancient Mesopotamian mathematics.
A Sumerian clay tablet found in Shuruppak near Baghdad and dated to c.
During the Hammurabi dynasty c.
Algorithms were also used in Babylonian astronomy.
Babylonian clay tablets describe and employ algorithmic procedures to compute the time and place of significant astronomical events.
Algorithms for arithmetic are also found in ancient Egyptian mathematics, dating back to the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus c.
Algorithms were later used in ancient Hellenistic mathematics.
Two examples are the Sieve of Eratosthenes, which was described in the Introduction to Arithmetic by Nicomachus, and the Euclidean algorithm, which was first described in Euclid's Elements (c.
Examples of ancient Indian mathematics included the Shulba Sutras, the Kerala School, and the Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta.
In the 9th century, Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī revolutionized the field by establishing the algorithm as a systematic, finite sequence of logical steps to solve mathematical problems.
In his influential work, The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing, he moved beyond specific numerical solutions to introduce general procedures for algebraic reduction and balancing.
This transformed mathematics into a 'mechanical' process of well-defined rules—a fundamental shift that laid the groundwork for modern algorithmic theory.
The Latin translation of his arithmetic treatise, titled Algoritmi de numero Indorum, led to the term algorithm being derived from the Latinization of his name, Algoritmi, specifically to describe this new rule-based approach to mathematics.
The first cryptographic algorithm for deciphering encrypted code was developed by Al-Kindi, a 9th-century Arab mathematician, in A Manuscript On Deciphering Cryptographic Messages.
He gave the first description of cryptanalysis by frequency analysis, the earliest codebreaking algorithm.
Weight-driven clocks were a key European invention in Middle Ages, specifically the verge escapement mechanism producing the tick of mechanical clocks.
Accurate automatic machines led to mechanical automata in the 13th century and computational machines—the difference and analytical engines of Charles Babbage and Ada Lovelace in the mid-19th century.
Lovelace designed the first algorithm intended for a computer, Babbage's analytical engine, the first real Turing-complete computer, more than the mechanical calculators of the time.
Although the full implementation of Babbage's second device was only built decades after her lifetime, Lovelace has been called "history's first programmer".
The Jacquard loom, a precursor to punch cards, and telephone switching machines led to the development of the first computers.
By the mid-19th century, the telegraph, was in use throughout the world.
By the late 19th century, ticker tape (c.
Then came the teleprinter (c.
Telephone-switching networks of electromechanical relays were invented in 1835.
These led to the invention of the digital adding device by George Stibitz in 1937.
While working in Bell Laboratories, he observed the "burdensome" use of mechanical calculators with gears, prompting him to experiment create an experimental digital adder at home.
In 1928, a partial formalization of the modern concept of algorithms began with attempts to solve David Hilbert's Entscheidungsproblem (decision problem).
Later formalizations were framed as attempts to define "effective calculability" or "effective method".
Those formalizations included the Gödel–Herbrand–Kleene recursive functions of 1930, 1934 and 1935, Alonzo Church's lambda calculus of 1936, Emil Post's Formulation 1 of 1936, and Alan Turing's Turing machines of 1936–37 and 1939.
For decades, it was assumed that algorithm evolution progresses from heuristics to formal algorithms.
A Symbolic integration provides a classic illustration.
In 1961, James Slagle’s program SAINT used heuristics to solve 52 of 54 freshman calculus exercises from an MIT textbook (≈96%).
In 1967, Larry Moses’s SIN refined the heuristics and achieved 100% success, though it remained heuristic.
Finally, in 1969, Robert Risch introduced the Risch Algorithm with formal guarantees.
This trajectory defined the traditional path: heuristics evolving until a definitive, guaranteed algorithm emerged.
However, the rise of transformer-based AI has inverted this sequence — classical algorithms are now being displaced by heuristics once again.
Algorithms have evolved and improved in many ways as time goes on.
Common uses of algorithms today include social media apps like Instagram and YouTube.
Algorithms are used as a way to analyze what people like and push more of those things to the people who interact with them.
Quantum computing uses quantum algorithm procedures to solve problems faster.
More recently, in 2024, NIST updated their post-quantum encryption standards, which includes new encryption algorithms to enhance defenses against attacks using quantum computing.
Algorithms can be expressed in many kinds of notation, including natural languages, pseudocode, flowcharts, drakon-charts, programming languages or control tables.
Natural language expressions of algorithms tend to be verbose and ambiguous and are rarely used for complex or technical algorithms.
Pseudocode, flowcharts, drakon-charts, and control tables are structured expressions of algorithms that avoid common ambiguities of natural language.
Programming languages are primarily for expressing algorithms in a computer-executable form but are also used to define or document algorithms.
There are many possible representations and Turing machine programs can be expressed as a sequence of machine tables (see finite-state machine, state-transition table, and control table for more), as flowcharts and drakon-charts (see state diagram for more), as a form of rudimentary machine code or assembly code called "sets of quadruples", and more.
Algorithm representations can also be classified into three accepted levels of Turing machine description: high-level description, implementation description, and formal description.
A high-level description describes the qualities of the algorithm itself, ignoring how it is implemented on the Turing machine.
An implementation description describes the general manner in which the machine moves its head and stores data to carry out the algorithm, but does not give exact states.
In the most detail, a formal description gives the exact state table and list of transitions of the Turing machine.
A flowchart is a graphical aid that describes and documents an algorithm.
It has four primary symbols: arrows showing program flow, rectangles (SEQUENCE, GOTO), diamonds representing decisions, and dots (OR-tie).
Sub-structures can "nest" in rectangles, but only if a single exit occurs from the superstructure.
It is often important to know the time, storage, or other cost an algorithm may require.
Methods have been developed to analyse algorithms to estimate these needs.
The algorithm only needs to remember two values: the sum of all the elements so far, and its current position in the input list.
Different algorithms may complete the same task with a different set of instructions in less or more time, space, or 'effort' than others.
The analysis, and study of algorithms is a discipline of computer science.
Algorithms are often studied abstractly, without referencing a specific programming language or implementation.
Like other mathematical disciplines, it focuses on the algorithm's properties, not implementation.
Pseudocode is typical for analysis as it is a simple and general representation.
Most algorithms are implemented on particular hardware/software platforms and their algorithmic efficiency is tested using real code.
The efficiency of a particular algorithm may be insignificant for many "one-off" problems but it can be critical for algorithms designed for fast, interactive, commercial, or long-life scientific usage.
Increasing the input size often exposes inefficient algorithms that are otherwise benign.
Empirical testing is useful for uncovering unexpected interactions that affect performance.
Benchmarks may be used to compare before/after potential improvements to an algorithm after program optimization.
Empirical tests cannot fully replace formal analysis, and are difficult to perform fairly.
To illustrate the potential improvements possible even in well-established algorithms, a recent significant innovation, relating to FFT algorithms used for image processing, can decrease processing time up to 1,000 times for medical imaging.
In general, speed improvements depend on special properties of the problem, which are very common in practical applications.
The best case of an algorithm refers to the scenario or input for which the algorithm or data structure takes the least time and resources to complete its tasks.
The worst case of an algorithm is the case that causes the algorithm or data structure to consume the maximum period of time and computational resources.
Algorithm design may take advantage of many different approaches, such as divide-and-conquer or dynamic programming.
Techniques for designing and implementing algorithms are also called algorithm design patterns.
Examples include the template method pattern and the decorator pattern.
An important aspect of algorithm design is efficient use of resources such as memory or time; the big O notation is used to describe how resource use changes as the size of inputs increase.
Any algorithm can be computed by any Turing complete model.
Turing completeness only requires four instruction types—conditional GOTO, unconditional GOTO, assignment, HALT.
Tausworthe augments the three Böhm-Jacopini canonical structures: SEQUENCE, IF-THEN-ELSE, and WHILE-DO, with two more: DO-WHILE and CASE.
An additional benefit of a structured program is that it lends itself to proofs of correctness using mathematical induction.
By themselves, algorithms are not usually patentable.
In the United States, a claim consisting solely of simple manipulations of abstract concepts, numbers, or signals does not constitute "processes", so algorithms are not patentable (as in Gottschalk v.
However, practical applications of algorithms can be patentable.
For example, in Diamond v.
Diehr, the application of a simple feedback algorithm to aid in the curing of synthetic rubber was deemed patentable.
The patenting of software is controversial, and there are criticized patents involving algorithms, especially data compression algorithms, such as Unisys's LZW patent.
Additionally, some cryptographic algorithms have export restrictions (see export of cryptography).
A recursive algorithm invokes itself repeatedly until meeting a termination condition and are a common functional programming technique.
Iterative algorithms use repetitions such as loops or data structures like stacks to solve problems.
Problems may be suited for one implementation or the other.
The Tower of Hanoi is a puzzle commonly solved using recursive implementation.
Every recursive version has an equivalent (but possibly more or less complex) iterative version, and vice versa.
Algorithms are usually discussed with the assumption that computers execute one instruction of an algorithm at a time on serial computers.
Serial algorithms are designed for these environments, unlike parallel or distributed algorithms.
Parallel algorithms take advantage of computer architectures where multiple processors can work on a problem at the same time.
Distributed algorithms use multiple machines connected via a computer network.
Parallel and distributed algorithms divide the problem into sub-problems and collect the results back together.
Resource consumption in these algorithms is not only processor cycles on each processor but also the communication overhead between the processors.
Some sorting algorithms can be parallelized efficiently, but their communication overhead is expensive.
Iterative algorithms are generally parallelizable, but some problems have no parallel algorithms and are called inherently serial problems.
Deterministic algorithms solve the problem with exact decisions at every step; whereas non-deterministic algorithms solve problems via guessing.
Guesses are typically made more accurate through the use of heuristics.
While many algorithms reach an exact solution, approximation algorithms seek an approximation that is close to the true solution.
Such algorithms have practical value for many hard problems.
For example, the Knapsack problem, where there is a set of items, and the goal is to pack the knapsack to get the maximum total value.
Each item has some weight and some value.
The total weight that can be carried is no more than some fixed number X.
So, the solution must consider the weights of items as well as their value.
Quantum algorithms run on a realistic model of quantum computation.
The term is usually used for those algorithms that seem inherently quantum or use some essential feature of Quantum computing such as quantum superposition or quantum entanglement.
Another way of classifying algorithms is by their design methodology or paradigm.
Brute force is a problem-solving method of systematically trying every possible option until the optimal solution is found.
This approach can be very time-consuming, testing every possible combination of variables.
It is often used when other methods are unavailable or too complex.
Brute force can solve a variety of problems, including finding the shortest path between two points and cracking passwords.
A divide-and-conquer algorithm repeatedly reduces a problem to one or more smaller instances of itself (usually recursively) until the instances are small enough to solve easily.
Merge sorting is an example of divide and conquer, where an unordered list is repeatedly split into smaller lists, which are sorted in the same way and then merged.
In a simpler variant of divide and conquer called prune and search or decrease-and-conquer algorithm, which solves one smaller instance of itself, and does not require a merge step.
An example of a prune and search algorithm is the binary search algorithm.
Many problems (such as playing chess) can be modelled as problems on graphs.
A graph exploration algorithm specifies rules for moving around a graph and is useful for such problems.
This category also includes search algorithms, branch and bound enumeration, and backtracking.
Such algorithms make some choices randomly (or pseudo-randomly).
They find approximate solutions when finding exact solutions may be impractical (see heuristic method below).
For some problems, the fastest approximations must involve some randomness.
Whether randomized algorithms with polynomial time complexity can be the fastest algorithm for some problems is an open question known as the P versus NP problem.
Monte Carlo algorithms return a correct answer with high probability.
RP is the subclass of these that run in polynomial time.
Las Vegas algorithms always return the correct answer, but their running time is only probabilistically bound, e.
This technique transforms difficult problems into better-known problems solvable with (hopefully) asymptotically optimal algorithms.
The goal is to find a reducing algorithm whose complexity is not dominated by the resulting reduced algorithms.
For example, one selection algorithm finds the median of an unsorted list by first sorting the list (the expensive portion), and then pulling out the middle element in the sorted list (the cheap portion).
This technique is also known as transform and conquer.
In this approach, multiple solutions are built incrementally and abandoned when it is determined that they cannot lead to a valid full solution.
When searching for optimal solutions to a linear function bound by linear equality and inequality constraints, the constraints can be used directly to produce optimal solutions.
There are algorithms that can solve any problem in this category, such as the popular simplex algorithm.
Problems that can be solved with linear programming include the maximum flow problem for directed graphs.
If a problem also requires that any of the unknowns be integers, then it is classified in integer programming.
A linear programming algorithm can solve such a problem if it can be proved that all restrictions for integer values are superficial, i.
In the general case, a specialized algorithm or an algorithm that finds approximate solutions is used, depending on the difficulty of the problem.
When a problem shows optimal substructures—meaning the optimal solution can be constructed from optimal solutions to subproblems—and overlapping subproblems, meaning the same subproblems are used to solve many different problem instances, a quicker approach called dynamic programming avoids recomputing solutions.
For example, Floyd–Warshall algorithm, the shortest path between a start and goal vertex in a weighted graph can be found using the shortest path to the goal from all adjacent vertices.
Dynamic programming and memoization go together.
Unlike divide and conquer, dynamic programming subproblems often overlap.
The difference between dynamic programming and simple recursion is the caching or memoization of recursive calls.
When subproblems are independent and do not repeat, memoization does not help; hence dynamic programming is not applicable to all complex problems.
Using memoization dynamic programming reduces the complexity of many problems from exponential to polynomial.
Greedy algorithms, similarly to a dynamic programming, work by examining substructures, in this case not of the problem but of a given solution.
Such algorithms start with some solution and improve it by making small modifications.
For some problems, they always find the optimal solution but for others they may stop at local optima.
The most popular use of greedy algorithms is finding minimal spanning trees of graphs without negative cycles.
Huffman Tree, Kruskal, Prim, Sollin are greedy algorithms that can solve this optimization problem.
In optimization problems, heuristic algorithms find solutions close to the optimal solution when finding the optimal solution is impractical.
These algorithms get closer and closer to the optimal solution as they progress.
In principle, if run for an infinite amount of time, they will find the optimal solution.
They can ideally find a solution very close to the optimal solution in a relatively short time.
These algorithms include local search, tabu search, simulated annealing, and genetic algorithms.
Some, like simulated annealing, are non-deterministic algorithms while others, like tabu search, are deterministic.
When a bound on the error of the non-optimal solution is known, the algorithm is further categorized as an approximation algorithm.
One of the simplest algorithms finds the largest number in a list of numbers of random order.
Finding the solution requires looking at every number in the list.
If a set of numbers is empty, then there is no highest number.
Assume the first number in the set is the largest.
For each remaining number in the set: if this number is greater than the current largest, it becomes the new largest.
When there are no unchecked numbers left in the set, consider the current largest number to be the largest in the set.
Artificial intelligence systems have been used to discover and optimize algorithms.
In 2023, Google DeepMind introduced AlphaDev, a reinforcement learning system based on AlphaZero that discovered improved sorting and hashing algorithms.
In a paper published in Nature, AlphaDev was reported to have discovered small sorting algorithms that outperformed previously known human benchmarks and were integrated into the LLVM standard C++ sorting library.
In 2025, Google DeepMind introduced AlphaEvolve, an evolutionary coding agent powered by large language models for general-purpose algorithm discovery and optimization.
AlphaEvolve uses language models to propose code changes, automated evaluators to test candidate solutions, and an evolutionary process to improve promising algorithms over multiple iterations.
Mathematics of the Yoruba People and of Their Neighbors in Southern Nigeria.
The Two-Year College Mathematics Journal, 1(2), 76–99.
NIST Releases First 3 Finalized Post-Quantum Encryption Standards.
Encyclopedia of Mathematics.
Logic is the study of correct reasoning.
It includes both formal and informal logic.
Formal logic is the study of deductively valid inferences or logical truths.
It examines how conclusions follow from premises based on the structure of arguments alone, independent of their topic and content.
Informal logic is associated with informal fallacies, critical thinking, and argumentation theory.
Informal logic examines arguments expressed in natural language whereas formal logic uses formal language.
When used as a countable noun, the term "a logic" refers to a specific logical formal system that articulates a proof system.
Logic plays a central role in many fields, such as philosophy, mathematics, computer science, and linguistics.
Logic studies arguments, which consist of a set of premises that leads to a conclusion.
An example is the argument from the premises "it's Sunday" and "if it's Sunday then I don't have to work" leading to the conclusion "I don't have to work.
An important feature of propositions is their internal structure.
Simple propositions also have parts, like "Sunday" or "work" in the example.
The truth of a proposition usually depends on the meanings of all of its parts.
However, this is not the case for logically true propositions.
They are true only because of their logical structure independent of the specific meanings of the individual parts.
Arguments can be either correct or incorrect.
An argument is correct if its premises support its conclusion.
Deductive arguments have the strongest form of support: if their premises are true then their conclusion must also be true.
This is not the case for ampliative arguments, which arrive at genuinely new information not found in the premises.
Many arguments in everyday discourse and the sciences are ampliative arguments.
They are divided into inductive and abductive arguments.
Inductive arguments are statistical generalizations, such as inferring that all ravens are black based on many individual observations of black ravens.
Abductive arguments are inferences to the best explanation, for example, when a doctor concludes that a patient has a certain disease which explains the symptoms they suffer.
Arguments that fall short of the standards of correct reasoning often embody fallacies.
Systems of logic are theoretical frameworks for assessing the correctness of arguments.
Logic has been studied since antiquity.
Early approaches include Aristotelian logic, Stoic logic, Nyaya, and Mohism.
Aristotelian logic focuses on reasoning in the form of syllogisms.
It was considered the main system of logic in the Western world until it was replaced by modern formal logic, which has its roots in the work of late 19th-century mathematicians such as Gottlob Frege.
Today, the most commonly used system is classical logic.
It consists of propositional logic and first-order logic.
Propositional logic only considers logical relations between full propositions.
First-order logic also takes the internal parts of propositions into account, like predicates and quantifiers.
Extended logics accept the basic intuitions behind classical logic and apply it to other fields, such as metaphysics, ethics, and epistemology, as frameworks for reasoning about what is possible or necessary, what is or should be, and what is believed or known.
Deviant logics, on the other hand, reject certain classical intuitions and provide alternative explanations of the basic laws of logic.
The word "logic" originates from the Greek word logos, which has a variety of translations, such as reason, discourse, or language.
Logic is traditionally defined as the study of the laws of thought or correct reasoning, and is usually understood in terms of inferences or arguments.
Reasoning is the activity of drawing inferences.
Arguments are the outward expression of inferences.
An argument is a set of premises together with a conclusion.
Logic is interested in whether arguments are correct, i.
These general characterizations apply to logic in the widest sense, i.
Formal logic is the traditionally dominant field, and some logicians restrict logic to formal logic.
Formal logic (also known as symbolic logic) is widely used in mathematical logic.
It uses a formal approach to study reasoning: it replaces concrete expressions with abstract symbols to examine the logical form of arguments independent of their concrete content.
In this sense, it is topic-neutral since it is only concerned with the abstract structure of arguments and not with their concrete content.
Formal logic is interested in deductively valid arguments, for which the truth of their premises ensures the truth of their conclusion.
This means that it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion to be false.
For valid arguments, the logical structure that leads from the premises to the conclusion follows a pattern called a rule of inference.
For example, modus ponens is a rule of inference according to which all arguments of the form "(1) p, (2) if p then q, (3) therefore q" are valid, independent of what the terms p and q stand for.
In this sense, formal logic can be defined as the science of valid inferences.
An alternative definition sees logic as the study of logical truths.
A proposition is logically true if its truth depends only on the logical vocabulary used in it.
This means that it is true in all possible worlds and under all interpretations of its non-logical terms, like the claim "either it is raining, or it is not".
These two definitions of formal logic are not identical, but they are closely related.
For example, if the inference from p to q is deductively valid then the claim "if p then q" is a logical truth.
Formal logic uses formal languages to express, analyze, and clarify arguments.
They normally have a very limited vocabulary and exact syntactic rules.
These rules specify how their symbols can be combined to construct sentences, so-called well-formed formulas.
This simplicity and exactness of formal logic make it capable of formulating precise rules of inference.
They determine whether a given argument is valid.
Because of the reliance on formal language, natural language arguments cannot be studied directly.
Instead, they need to be translated into formal language before their validity can be assessed.
The term "logic" can also be used in a slightly different sense as a countable noun.
In this sense, a logic is a logical formal system.
Distinct logics differ from each other concerning the rules of inference they accept as valid and the formal languages used to express them.
Starting in the late 19th century, many new formal systems have been proposed.
There are disagreements about what makes a formal system a logic.
For example, it has been suggested that only logically complete systems, like first-order logic, qualify as logics.
For such reasons, some theorists deny that higher-order logics are logics in the strict sense.
When understood in a wide sense, logic encompasses both formal and informal logic.
Informal logic uses non-formal criteria and standards to analyze and assess the correctness of arguments.
Its main focus is on everyday discourse.
Its development was prompted by difficulties in applying the insights of formal logic to natural language arguments.
In this regard, it considers problems that formal logic on its own is unable to address.
Both provide criteria for assessing the correctness of arguments and distinguishing them from fallacies.
Many characterizations of informal logic have been suggested but there is no general agreement on its precise definition.
The most literal approach sees the terms "formal" and "informal" as applying to the language used to express arguments.
On this view, informal logic studies arguments that are in informal or natural language.
Formal logic can only examine them indirectly by translating them first into a formal language while informal logic investigates them in their original form.
On this view, the argument "Birds fly.
Therefore, Tweety flies.
The study of natural language arguments comes with various difficulties.
For example, natural language expressions are often ambiguous, vague, and context-dependent.
Another approach defines informal logic in a wide sense as the normative study of the standards, criteria, and procedures of argumentation.
In this sense, it includes questions about the role of rationality, critical thinking, and the psychology of argumentation.
Another characterization identifies informal logic with the study of non-deductive arguments.
In this way, it contrasts with deductive reasoning examined by formal logic.
Non-deductive arguments make their conclusion probable but do not ensure that it is true.
An example is the inductive argument from the empirical observation that "all ravens I have seen so far are black" to the conclusion "all ravens are black".
A further approach is to define informal logic as the study of informal fallacies.
Informal fallacies are incorrect arguments in which errors are present in the content and the context of the argument.
A false dilemma, for example, involves an error of content by excluding viable options.
This is the case in the fallacy "you are either with us or against us; you are not with us; therefore, you are against us".
Some theorists state that formal logic studies the general form of arguments while informal logic studies particular instances of arguments.
Another approach is to hold that formal logic only considers the role of logical constants for correct inferences while informal logic also takes the meaning of substantive concepts into account.
Further approaches focus on the discussion of logical topics with or without formal devices and on the role of epistemology for the assessment of arguments.
Premises and conclusions are the basic parts of inferences or arguments and therefore play a central role in logic.
In the case of a valid inference or a correct argument, the conclusion follows from the premises, or in other words, the premises support the conclusion.
For instance, the premises "Mars is red" and "Mars is a planet" support the conclusion "Mars is a red planet".
For most types of logic, it is accepted that premises and conclusions have to be truth-bearers.
This means that they have a truth value: they are either true or false.
Contemporary philosophy generally sees them either as propositions or as sentences.
Propositions are the denotations of sentences and are usually seen as abstract objects.
For example, the English sentence "the tree is green" is different from the German sentence "der Baum ist grün" but both express the same proposition.
Propositional theories of premises and conclusions are often criticized because they rely on abstract objects.
For instance, philosophical naturalists usually reject the existence of abstract objects.
Other arguments concern the challenges involved in specifying the identity criteria of propositions.
These objections are avoided by seeing premises and conclusions not as propositions but as sentences, i.
But this approach comes with new problems of its own: sentences are often context-dependent and ambiguous, meaning an argument's validity would not only depend on its parts but also on its context and on how it is interpreted.
Another approach is to understand premises and conclusions in psychological terms as thoughts or judgments.
This position is known as psychologism.
It was discussed at length around the turn of the 20th century but it is not widely accepted today.
Premises and conclusions have an internal structure.
As propositions or sentences, they can be either simple or complex.
A complex proposition has other propositions as its constituents, which are linked to each other through propositional connectives like "and" or "if.
Simple propositions, on the other hand, do not have propositional parts.
But they can also be conceived as having an internal structure: they are made up of subpropositional parts, like singular terms and predicates.
For example, the simple proposition "Mars is red" can be formed by applying the predicate "red" to the singular term "Mars".
In contrast, the complex proposition "Mars is red and Venus is white" is made up of two simple propositions connected by the propositional connective "and".
Whether a proposition is true depends, at least in part, on its constituents.
For complex propositions formed using truth-functional propositional connectives, their truth only depends on the truth values of their parts.
But this relation is more complicated in the case of simple propositions and their subpropositional parts.
These subpropositional parts have meanings of their own, like referring to objects or classes of objects.
Whether the simple proposition they form is true depends on their relation to reality, i.
This topic is studied by theories of reference.
Some complex propositions are true independently of the substantive meanings of their parts.
In classical logic, for example, the complex proposition "either Mars is red or Mars is not red" is true independent of whether its parts, like the simple proposition "Mars is red", are true or false.
In such cases, the truth is called a logical truth: a proposition is logically true if its truth depends only on the logical vocabulary used in it.
This means that it is true under all interpretations of its non-logical terms.
In some modal logics, this means that the proposition is true in all possible worlds.
Some theorists define logic as the study of logical truths.
Truth tables can be used to show how logical connectives work or how the truth values of complex propositions depends on their parts.
They have a column for each input variable.
Each row corresponds to one possible combination of the truth values these variables can take; for truth tables presented in the English literature, the symbols "T" and "F" or "1" and "0" are commonly used as abbreviations for the truth values "true" and "false".
The first columns present all the possible truth-value combinations for the input variables.
Entries in the other columns present the truth values of the corresponding expressions as determined by the input values.
It could be used to express a sentence like "yesterday was Sunday and the weather was good".
In all other cases, the expression as a whole is false.
Truth tables can also be defined for more complex expressions that use several propositional connectives.
Logic is commonly defined in terms of arguments or inferences as the study of their correctness.
An argument is a set of premises together with a conclusion.
An inference is the process of reasoning from these premises to the conclusion.
But these terms are often used interchangeably in logic.
Arguments are correct or incorrect depending on whether their premises support their conclusion.
Premises and conclusions, on the other hand, are true or false depending on whether they are in accord with reality.
In formal logic, a sound argument is an argument that is both correct and has only true premises.
Sometimes a distinction is made between simple and complex arguments.
A complex argument is made up of a chain of simple arguments.
This means that the conclusion of one argument acts as a premise of later arguments.
For a complex argument to be successful, each link of the chain has to be successful.
Arguments and inferences are either correct or incorrect.
If they are correct then their premises support their conclusion.
In the incorrect case, this support is missing.
It can take different forms corresponding to the different types of reasoning.
The strongest form of support corresponds to deductive reasoning.
But even arguments that are not deductively valid may still be good arguments because their premises offer non-deductive support to their conclusions.
For such cases, the term ampliative or inductive reasoning is used.
Deductive arguments are associated with formal logic in contrast to the relation between ampliative arguments and informal logic.
A deductively valid argument is one whose premises guarantee the truth of its conclusion.
For instance, the argument "(1) all frogs are amphibians; (2) no cats are amphibians; (3) therefore no cats are frogs" is deductively valid.
For deductive validity, it does not matter whether the premises or the conclusion are actually true.
So the argument "(1) all frogs are mammals; (2) no cats are mammals; (3) therefore no cats are frogs" is also valid because the conclusion follows necessarily from the premises.
According to an influential view by Alfred Tarski, deductive arguments have three essential features: (1) they are formal, i.
Because of the first feature, the focus on formality, deductive inference is usually identified with rules of inference.
Rules of inference specify the form of the premises and the conclusion: how they have to be structured for the inference to be valid.
Arguments that do not follow any rule of inference are deductively invalid.
The modus ponens is a prominent rule of inference.
It has the form "p; if p, then q; therefore q".
The third feature can be expressed by stating that deductively valid inferences are truth-preserving: it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion to be false.
Because of this feature, it is often asserted that deductive inferences are uninformative since the conclusion cannot arrive at new information not already present in the premises.
But this point is not always accepted since it would mean, for example, that most of mathematics is uninformative.
A different characterization distinguishes between surface and depth information.
The surface information of a sentence is the information it presents explicitly.
Depth information is the totality of the information contained in the sentence, both explicitly and implicitly.
According to this view, deductive inferences are uninformative on the depth level.
But they can be highly informative on the surface level by making implicit information explicit.
This happens, for example, in mathematical proofs.
Ampliative arguments are arguments whose conclusions contain additional information not found in their premises.
In this regard, they are more interesting since they contain information on the depth level and the thinker may learn something genuinely new.
But this feature comes with a certain cost: the premises support the conclusion in the sense that they make its truth more likely but they do not ensure its truth.
This means that the conclusion of an ampliative argument may be false even though all its premises are true.
This characteristic is closely related to non-monotonicity and defeasibility: it may be necessary to retract an earlier conclusion upon receiving new information or in light of new inferences drawn.
Ampliative reasoning plays a central role in many arguments found in everyday discourse and the sciences.
Ampliative arguments are not automatically incorrect.
Instead, they just follow different standards of correctness.
The support they provide for their conclusion usually comes in degrees.
This means that strong ampliative arguments make their conclusion very likely while weak ones are less certain.
As a consequence, the line between correct and incorrect arguments is blurry in some cases, such as when the premises offer weak but non-negligible support.
This contrasts with deductive arguments, which are either valid or invalid with nothing in-between.
The terminology used to categorize ampliative arguments is inconsistent.
Some authors, like James Hawthorne, use the term "induction" to cover all forms of non-deductive arguments.
But in a more narrow sense, induction is only one type of ampliative argument alongside abductive arguments.
Some philosophers, like Leo Groarke, also allow conductive arguments as another type.
In this narrow sense, induction is often defined as a form of statistical generalization.
In this case, the premises of an inductive argument are many individual observations that all show a certain pattern.
The conclusion then is a general law that this pattern always obtains.
In this sense, one may infer that "all elephants are gray" based on one's past observations of the color of elephants.
A closely related form of inductive inference has as its conclusion not a general law but one more specific instance, as when it is inferred that an elephant one has not seen yet is also gray.
Some theorists, like Igor Douven, stipulate that inductive inferences rest only on statistical considerations.
This way, they can be distinguished from abductive inference.
Abductive inference may or may not take statistical observations into consideration.
In either case, the premises offer support for the conclusion because the conclusion is the best explanation of why the premises are true.
In this sense, abduction is also called the inference to the best explanation.
For example, given the premise that there is a plate with breadcrumbs in the kitchen in the early morning, one may infer the conclusion that one's house-mate had a midnight snack and was too tired to clean the table.
This conclusion is justified because it is the best explanation of the current state of the kitchen.
For abduction, it is not sufficient that the conclusion explains the premises.
For example, the conclusion that a burglar broke into the house last night, got hungry on the job, and had a midnight snack, would also explain the state of the kitchen.
But this conclusion is not justified because it is not the best or most likely explanation.
Not all arguments live up to the standards of correct reasoning.
When they do not, they are usually referred to as fallacies.
Their central aspect is not that their conclusion is false but that there is some flaw with the reasoning leading to this conclusion.
So the argument "it is sunny today; therefore spiders have eight legs" is fallacious even though the conclusion is true.
Some theorists, like John Stuart Mill, give a more restrictive definition of fallacies by additionally requiring that they appear to be correct.
This way, genuine fallacies can be distinguished from mere mistakes of reasoning due to carelessness.
This explains why people tend to commit fallacies: because they have an alluring element that seduces people into committing and accepting them.
However, this reference to appearances is controversial because it belongs to the field of psychology, not logic, and because appearances may be different for different people.
Fallacies are usually divided into formal and informal fallacies.
For formal fallacies, the source of the error is found in the form of the argument.
For example, denying the antecedent is one type of formal fallacy, as in "if Othello is a bachelor, then he is male; Othello is not a bachelor; therefore Othello is not male".
But most fallacies fall into the category of informal fallacies, of which a great variety is discussed in the academic literature.
The source of their error is usually found in the content or the context of the argument.
Informal fallacies are sometimes categorized as fallacies of ambiguity, fallacies of presumption, or fallacies of relevance.
For fallacies of ambiguity, the ambiguity and vagueness of natural language are responsible for their flaw, as in "feathers are light; what is light cannot be dark; therefore feathers cannot be dark".
Fallacies of presumption have a wrong or unjustified premise but may be valid otherwise.
In the case of fallacies of relevance, the premises do not support the conclusion because they are not relevant to it.
The main focus of most logicians is to study the criteria according to which an argument is correct or incorrect.
A fallacy is committed if these criteria are violated.
In the case of formal logic, they are known as rules of inference.
They are definitory rules, which determine whether an inference is correct or which inferences are allowed.
Definitory rules contrast with strategic rules.
Strategic rules specify which inferential moves are necessary to reach a given conclusion based on a set of premises.
This distinction does not just apply to logic but also to games.
In chess, for example, the definitory rules dictate that bishops may only move diagonally.
The strategic rules, on the other hand, describe how the allowed moves may be used to win a game, for instance, by controlling the center and by defending one's king.
It has been argued that logicians should give more emphasis to strategic rules since they are highly relevant for effective reasoning.
A formal system of logic consists of a formal language together with a set of axioms and a proof system used to draw inferences from these axioms.
In logic, axioms are statements that are accepted without proof.
They are used to justify other statements.
Some theorists also include a semantics that specifies how the expressions of the formal language relate to real objects.
Starting in the late 19th century, many new formal systems have been proposed.
A formal language consists of an alphabet and syntactic rules.
The alphabet is the set of basic symbols used in expressions.
The syntactic rules determine how these symbols may be arranged to result in well-formed formulas.
A proof system is a collection of rules to construct formal proofs.
It is a tool to arrive at conclusions from a set of axioms.
Rules in a proof system are defined in terms of the syntactic form of formulas independent of their specific content.
Such rules can be applied sequentially, giving a mechanical procedure for generating conclusions from premises.
There are different types of proof systems including natural deduction and sequent calculi.
A semantics is a system for mapping expressions of a formal language to their denotations.
In many systems of logic, denotations are truth values.
From the semantic point of view, a premise entails a conclusion if the conclusion is true whenever the premise is true.
A system of logic is sound when its proof system cannot derive a conclusion from a set of premises unless it is semantically entailed by them.
In other words, its proof system cannot lead to false conclusions, as defined by the semantics.
A system is complete when its proof system can derive every conclusion that is semantically entailed by its premises.
In other words, its proof system can lead to any true conclusion, as defined by the semantics.
Thus, soundness and completeness together describe a system whose notions of validity and entailment line up perfectly.
Systems of logic are theoretical frameworks for assessing the correctness of reasoning and arguments.
For over two thousand years, Aristotelian logic was treated as the canon of logic in the Western world, but modern developments in this field have led to a vast proliferation of logical systems.
One prominent categorization divides modern formal logical systems into classical logic, extended logics, and deviant logics.
Aristotelian logic encompasses a great variety of topics.
They include metaphysical theses about ontological categories and problems of scientific explanation.
But in a more narrow sense, it is identical to term logic or syllogistics.
A syllogism is a form of argument involving three propositions: two premises and a conclusion.
Each proposition has three essential parts: a subject, a predicate, and a copula connecting the subject to the predicate.
For example, the proposition "Socrates is wise" is made up of the subject "Socrates", the predicate "wise", and the copula "is".
The subject and the predicate are the terms of the proposition.
Aristotelian logic does not contain complex propositions made up of simple propositions.
It differs in this aspect from propositional logic, in which any two propositions can be linked using a logical connective like "and" to form a new complex proposition.
In Aristotelian logic, the subject can be universal, particular, indefinite, or singular.
For example, the term "all humans" is a universal subject in the proposition "all humans are mortal".
A similar proposition could be formed by replacing it with the particular term "some humans", the indefinite term "a human", or the singular term "Socrates".
Aristotelian logic only includes predicates for simple properties of entities.
But it lacks predicates corresponding to relations between entities.
The predicate can be linked to the subject in two ways: either by affirming it or by denying it.
For example, the proposition "Socrates is not a cat" involves the denial of the predicate "cat" to the subject "Socrates".
Using combinations of subjects and predicates, a great variety of propositions and syllogisms can be formed.
Syllogisms are characterized by the fact that the premises are linked to each other and to the conclusion by sharing one term in each case.
Thus, these three propositions contain three terms, referred to as major term, minor term, and middle term.
The central aspect of Aristotelian logic involves classifying all possible syllogisms into valid and invalid arguments according to how the propositions are formed.
For example, the syllogism "all men are mortal; Socrates is a man; therefore Socrates is mortal" is valid.
The syllogism "all cats are mortal; Socrates is mortal; therefore Socrates is a cat", on the other hand, is invalid.
Classical logic is distinct from traditional or Aristotelian logic.
It encompasses propositional logic and first-order logic.
It is "classical" in the sense that it is based on basic logical intuitions shared by most logicians.
These intuitions include the law of excluded middle, the double negation elimination, the principle of explosion, and the bivalence of truth.
It was originally developed to analyze mathematical arguments and was only later applied to other fields as well.
Because of this focus on mathematics, it does not include logical vocabulary relevant to many other topics of philosophical importance.
Examples of concepts it overlooks are the contrast between necessity and possibility and the problem of ethical obligation and permission.
Similarly, it does not address the relations between past, present, and future.
Such issues are addressed by extended logics.
They build on the basic intuitions of classical logic and expand it by introducing new logical vocabulary.
This way, the exact logical approach is applied to fields like ethics or epistemology that lie beyond the scope of mathematics.
Propositional logic comprises formal systems in which formulae are built from atomic propositions using logical connectives.
Unlike predicate logic where terms and predicates are the smallest units, propositional logic takes full propositions with truth values as its most basic component.
Thus, propositional logics can only represent logical relationships that arise from the way complex propositions are built from simpler ones.
But it cannot represent inferences that result from the inner structure of a proposition.
First-order logic includes the same propositional connectives as propositional logic but differs from it because it articulates the internal structure of propositions.
This happens through devices such as singular terms, which refer to particular objects, predicates, which refer to properties and relations, and quantifiers, which treat notions like "some" and "all".
Extended logics are logical systems that accept the basic principles of classical logic.
They introduce additional symbols and principles to apply it to fields like metaphysics, ethics, and epistemology.
Modal logic is an extension of classical logic.
To include these symbols in the logical formalism, modal logic introduces new rules of inference that govern what role they play in inferences.
One rule of inference states that, if something is necessary, then it is also possible.
Another principle states that if a proposition is necessary then its negation is impossible and vice versa.
Other forms of modal logic introduce similar symbols but associate different meanings with them to apply modal logic to other fields.
For example, deontic logic concerns the field of ethics and introduces symbols to express the ideas of obligation and permission, i.
The modal operators in temporal modal logic articulate temporal relations.
They can be used to express, for example, that something happened at one time or that something is happening all the time.
In epistemology, epistemic modal logic is used to represent the ideas of knowing something in contrast to merely believing it to be the case.
Higher-order logics extend classical logic not by using modal operators but by introducing new forms of quantification.
Quantifiers correspond to terms like "all" or "some".
In classical first-order logic, quantifiers are only applied to individuals.
In higher-order logics, quantification is also allowed over predicates.
This increases its expressive power.
The added expressive power is especially useful for mathematics since it allows for more succinct formulations of mathematical theories.
But it has drawbacks in regard to its meta-logical properties and ontological implications, which is why first-order logic is still more commonly used.
Deviant logics are logical systems that reject some of the basic intuitions of classical logic.
Because of this, they are usually seen not as its supplements but as its rivals.
Deviant logical systems differ from each other either because they reject different classical intuitions or because they propose different alternatives to the same issue.
Intuitionistic logic is a restricted version of classical logic.
It uses the same symbols but excludes some rules of inference.
For example, according to the law of double negation elimination, if a sentence is not not true, then it is true.
This is a valid rule of inference in classical logic but it is invalid in intuitionistic logic.
Another classical principle not part of intuitionistic logic is the law of excluded middle.
It states that for every sentence, either it or its negation is true.
These deviations from classical logic are based on the idea that truth is established by verification using a proof.
Intuitionistic logic is especially prominent in the field of constructive mathematics, which emphasizes the need to find or construct a specific example to prove its existence.
Multi-valued logics depart from classicality by rejecting the principle of bivalence, which requires all propositions to be either true or false.
For instance, Jan Łukasiewicz and Stephen Cole Kleene both proposed ternary logics which have a third truth value representing that a statement's truth value is indeterminate.
These logics have been applied in the field of linguistics.
Fuzzy logics are multivalued logics that have an infinite number of "degrees of truth", represented by a real number between 0 and 1.
Paraconsistent logics are logical systems that can deal with contradictions.
They are formulated to avoid the principle of explosion: for them, it is not the case that anything follows from a contradiction.
They are often motivated by dialetheism, the view that contradictions are real or that reality itself is contradictory.
Graham Priest is an influential contemporary proponent of this position and similar views have been ascribed to Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel.
Informal logic is usually carried out in a less systematic way.
It often focuses on more specific issues, like investigating a particular type of fallacy or studying a certain aspect of argumentation.
Nonetheless, some frameworks of informal logic have also been presented that try to provide a systematic characterization of the correctness of arguments.
The pragmatic or dialogical approach to informal logic sees arguments as speech acts and not merely as a set of premises together with a conclusion.
As speech acts, they occur in a certain context, like a dialogue, which affects the standards of right and wrong arguments.
A prominent version by Douglas N.
Walton understands a dialogue as a game between two players.
The initial position of each player is characterized by the propositions to which they are committed and the conclusion they intend to prove.
Dialogues are games of persuasion: each player has the goal of convincing the opponent of their own conclusion.
This is achieved by making arguments: arguments are the moves of the game.
They affect to which propositions the players are committed.
A winning move is a successful argument that takes the opponent's commitments as premises and shows how one's own conclusion follows from them.
This is usually not possible straight away.
For this reason, it is normally necessary to formulate a sequence of arguments as intermediary steps, each of which brings the opponent a little closer to one's intended conclusion.
Besides these positive arguments leading one closer to victory, there are also negative arguments preventing the opponent's victory by denying their conclusion.
Whether an argument is correct depends on whether it promotes the progress of the dialogue.
Fallacies, on the other hand, are violations of the standards of proper argumentative rules.
These standards also depend on the type of dialogue.
For example, the standards governing the scientific discourse differ from the standards in business negotiations.
The epistemic approach to informal logic, on the other hand, focuses on the epistemic role of arguments.
It is based on the idea that arguments aim to increase our knowledge.
They achieve this by linking justified beliefs to beliefs that are not yet justified.
Correct arguments succeed at expanding knowledge while fallacies are epistemic failures: they do not justify the belief in their conclusion.
For example, the fallacy of begging the question is a fallacy because it fails to provide independent justification for its conclusion, even though it is deductively valid.
In this sense, logical normativity consists in epistemic success or rationality.
The Bayesian approach is one example of an epistemic approach.
Central to Bayesianism is not just whether the agent believes something but the degree to which they believe it, the so-called credence.
Degrees of belief are seen as subjective probabilities in the believed proposition, i.
On this view, reasoning can be interpreted as a process of changing one's credences, often in reaction to new incoming information.
Correct reasoning and the arguments it is based on follow the laws of probability, for example, the principle of conditionalization.
Bad or irrational reasoning, on the other hand, violates these laws.
Logic is studied in various fields.
In many cases, this is done by applying its formal method to specific topics outside its scope, like to ethics or computer science.
In other cases, logic itself is made the subject of research in another discipline.
This can happen in diverse ways.
For instance, it can involve investigating the philosophical assumptions linked to the basic concepts used by logicians.
Other ways include interpreting and analyzing logic through mathematical structures as well as studying and comparing abstract properties of formal logical systems.
Philosophy of logic is the philosophical discipline studying the scope and nature of logic.
It examines many presuppositions implicit in logic, like how to define its basic concepts or the metaphysical assumptions associated with them.
It is also concerned with how to classify logical systems and considers the ontological commitments they incur.
Philosophical logic is one of the areas within the philosophy of logic.
It studies the application of logical methods to philosophical problems in fields like metaphysics, ethics, and epistemology.
This application usually happens in the form of extended or deviant logical systems.
Metalogic is the field of inquiry studying the properties of formal logical systems.
For example, when a new formal system is developed, metalogicians may study it to determine which formulas can be proven in it.
They may also study whether an algorithm could be developed to find a proof for each formula and whether every provable formula in it is a tautology.
Finally, they may compare it to other logical systems to understand its distinctive features.
A key issue in metalogic concerns the relation between syntax and semantics.
The syntactic rules of a formal system determine how to deduce conclusions from premises, i.
The semantics of a formal system governs which sentences are true and which ones are false.
This determines the validity of arguments since, for valid arguments, it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion to be false.
The relation between syntax and semantics concerns issues like whether every valid argument is provable and whether every provable argument is valid.
Metalogicians also study whether logical systems are complete, sound, and consistent.
They are interested in whether the systems are decidable and what expressive power they have.
Metalogicians usually rely heavily on abstract mathematical reasoning when examining and formulating metalogical proofs.
This way, they aim to arrive at precise and general conclusions on these topics.
The term "mathematical logic" is sometimes used as a synonym of "formal logic".
But in a more restricted sense, it refers to the study of logic within mathematics.
Major subareas include model theory, proof theory, set theory, and computability theory.
Research in mathematical logic commonly addresses the mathematical properties of formal systems of logic.
However, it can also include attempts to use logic to analyze mathematical reasoning or to establish logic-based foundations of mathematics.
The latter was a major concern in early 20th-century mathematical logic, which pursued the program of logicism pioneered by philosopher-logicians such as Gottlob Frege, Alfred North Whitehead, and Bertrand Russell.
Mathematical theories were supposed to be logical tautologies, and their program was to show this by means of a reduction of mathematics to logic.
Many attempts to realize this program failed, from the crippling of Frege's project in his Grundgesetze by Russell's paradox, to the defeat of Hilbert's program by Gödel's incompleteness theorems.
Set theory originated in the study of the infinite by Georg Cantor, and it has been the source of many of the most challenging and important issues in mathematical logic.
They include Cantor's theorem, the status of the Axiom of Choice, the question of the independence of the continuum hypothesis, and the modern debate on large cardinal axioms.
Computability theory is the branch of mathematical logic that studies effective procedures to solve calculation problems.
One of its main goals is to understand whether it is possible to solve a given problem using an algorithm.
For instance, given a certain claim about the positive integers, it examines whether an algorithm can be found to determine if this claim is true.
Computability theory uses various theoretical tools and models, such as Turing machines, to explore this type of issue.
Computational logic is the branch of logic and computer science that studies how to implement mathematical reasoning and logical formalisms using computers.
This includes, for example, automatic theorem provers, which employ rules of inference to construct a proof step by step from a set of premises to the intended conclusion without human intervention.
Logic programming languages are designed specifically to express facts using logical formulas and to draw inferences from these facts.
For example, Prolog is a logic programming language based on predicate logic.
Computer scientists also apply concepts from logic to problems in computing.
The works of Claude Shannon were influential in this regard.
He showed how Boolean logic can be used to understand and implement computer circuits.
This can be achieved using electronic logic gates, i.
The truth values of propositions are represented by voltage levels.
In this way, logic functions can be simulated by applying the corresponding voltages to the inputs of the circuit and determining the value of the function by measuring the voltage of the output.
Formal semantics is a subfield of logic, linguistics, and the philosophy of language.
The discipline of semantics studies the meaning of language.
Formal semantics uses formal tools from the fields of symbolic logic and mathematics to give precise theories of the meaning of natural language expressions.
It understands meaning usually in relation to truth conditions, i.
One of its central methodological assumptions is the principle of compositionality.
It states that the meaning of a complex expression is determined by the meanings of its parts and how they are combined.
For example, the meaning of the verb phrase "walk and sing" depends on the meanings of the individual expressions "walk" and "sing".
Many theories in formal semantics rely on model theory.
This means that they employ set theory to construct a model and then interpret the meanings of expression in relation to the elements in this model.
For example, the term "walk" may be interpreted as the set of all individuals in the model that share the property of walking.
Early influential theorists in this field were Richard Montague and Barbara Partee, who focused their analysis on the English language.
The epistemology of logic studies how one knows that an argument is valid or that a proposition is logically true.
This includes questions like how to justify that modus ponens is a valid rule of inference or that contradictions are false.
The traditionally dominant view is that this form of logical understanding belongs to knowledge a priori.
In this regard, it is often argued that the mind has a special faculty to examine relations between pure ideas and that this faculty is also responsible for apprehending logical truths.
A similar approach understands the rules of logic in terms of linguistic conventions.
On this view, the laws of logic are trivial since they are true by definition: they just express the meanings of the logical vocabulary.
Some theorists, like Hilary Putnam and Penelope Maddy, object to the view that logic is knowable a priori.
They hold instead that logical truths depend on the empirical world.
This is usually combined with the claim that the laws of logic express universal regularities found in the structural features of the world.
According to this view, they may be explored by studying general patterns of the fundamental sciences.
This claim can be used as an empirical argument for the thesis that quantum logic is the correct logical system and should replace classical logic.
Logic was developed independently in several cultures during antiquity.
One major early contributor was Aristotle, who developed term logic in his Organon and Prior Analytics.
He was responsible for the introduction of the hypothetical syllogism and temporal modal logic.
Further innovations include inductive logic as well as the discussion of new logical concepts such as terms, predicables, syllogisms, and propositions.
Aristotelian logic was highly regarded in classical and medieval times, both in Europe and the Middle East.
It remained in wide use in the West until the early 19th century.
It has now been superseded by later work, though many of its key insights are still present in modern systems of logic.
Ibn Sina (Avicenna) was the founder of Avicennian logic, which replaced Aristotelian logic as the dominant system of logic in the Islamic world.
It influenced Western medieval writers such as Albertus Magnus and William of Ockham.
Ibn Sina wrote on the hypothetical syllogism and on the propositional calculus.
He developed an original "temporally modalized" syllogistic theory, involving temporal logic and modal logic.
He also made use of inductive logic, such as his methods of agreement, difference, and concomitant variation, which are critical to the scientific method.
Fakhr al-Din al-Razi was another influential Muslim logician.
He criticized Aristotelian syllogistics and formulated an early system of inductive logic, foreshadowing the system of inductive logic developed by John Stuart Mill.
During the Middle Ages, many translations and interpretations of Aristotelian logic were made.
The works of Boethius were particularly influential.
Besides translating Aristotle's work into Latin, he also produced textbooks on logic.
Later, the works of Islamic philosophers such as Ibn Sina and Ibn Rushd (Averroes) were drawn on.
This expanded the range of ancient works available to medieval Christian scholars since more Greek work was available to Muslim scholars that had been preserved in Latin commentaries.
In 1323, William of Ockham's influential Summa Logicae was released.
It is a comprehensive treatise on logic that discusses many basic concepts of logic and provides a systematic exposition of types of propositions and their truth conditions.
In Chinese philosophy, the School of Names and Mohism were particularly influential.
The School of Names focused on the use of language and on paradoxes.
For example, Gongsun Long proposed the white horse paradox, which defends the thesis that a white horse is not a horse.
The school of Mohism also acknowledged the importance of language for logic and tried to relate the ideas in these fields to the realm of ethics.
In India, the study of logic was primarily pursued by the schools of Nyaya, Buddhism, and Jainism.
It was not treated as a separate academic discipline and discussions of its topics usually happened in the context of epistemology and theories of dialogue or argumentation.
In Nyaya, inference is understood as a source of knowledge (pramāṇa).
It follows the perception of an object and tries to arrive at conclusions, for example, about the cause of this object.
A similar emphasis on the relation to epistemology is also found in Buddhist and Jainist schools of logic, where inference is used to expand the knowledge gained through other sources.
Some of the later theories of Nyaya, belonging to the Navya-Nyāya school, resemble modern forms of logic, such as Gottlob Frege's distinction between sense and reference and his definition of number.
The syllogistic logic developed by Aristotle predominated in the West until the mid-19th century, when interest in the foundations of mathematics stimulated the development of modern symbolic logic.
Many see Gottlob Frege's Begriffsschrift as the birthplace of modern logic.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's idea of a universal formal language is often considered a forerunner.
Other pioneers were George Boole, who invented Boolean algebra as a mathematical system of logic, and Charles Peirce, who developed the logic of relatives.
Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell, in turn, condensed many of these insights in their work Principia Mathematica.
Modern logic introduced novel concepts, such as functions, quantifiers, and relational predicates.
A hallmark of modern symbolic logic is its use of formal language to precisely codify its insights.
In this regard, it departs from earlier logicians, who relied mainly on natural language.
Of particular influence was the development of first-order logic, which is usually treated as the standard system of modern logic.
Its analytical generality allowed the formalization of mathematics and drove the investigation of set theory.
It also made Alfred Tarski's approach to model theory possible and provided the foundation of modern mathematical logic.
Ancient history is a time period from the beginning of writing and recorded human history through late antiquity.
The span of recorded history is roughly 5,000 years, beginning with the development of Sumerian cuneiform script.
Ancient history covers all continents inhabited by humans in the period 3000 BC – AD 500, ending with the expansion of Islam in late antiquity.
The three-age system periodises ancient history into the Stone Age, the Bronze Age, and the Iron Age, with recorded history usually considered to begin with the Bronze Age.
The start and end of the three ages vary between world regions.
In many regions the Bronze Age is generally considered to begin a few centuries prior to 3000 BC, while the end of the Iron Age varies from the early first millennium BC in some regions to the late first millennium AD in others.
During the time period of ancient history, the world population was exponentially increasing due to the Neolithic Revolution, which was in full progress.
In 10,000 BC, the world population stood at an estimated 2 million, it rose to 45 million by 3000 BC.
By the Iron Age in 1000 BC, the population had risen to 72 million.
By the end of the ancient period in AD 500, the world population is thought to have stood at 209 million.
In 10,500 years, the world population increased by 100 times.
Prehistory is the period before written history.
Most of the knowledge of that period comes from the work of archaeologists.
The early human migrations in the Lower Paleolithic saw Homo erectus spread across Eurasia 1.
Evidence for the use of fire has been dated as early as 1.
Actual use of hearths first appears 400,000 years ago.
Dates for the emergence of Homo sapiens (modern humans) range from 250,000 to 160,000 years ago, with the varying dates being based on DNA studies and fossils respectively.
Some 50,000 years ago, Homo sapiens migrated out of Africa.
They reached Australia about 45,000 years ago, southwestern Europe about the same time, southeastern Europe and Siberia around 40,000 years ago, and Japan about 30,000 years ago.
Humans migrated to the Americas about 15,000 years ago.
Evidence for agriculture emerges in about 9000 BC in what is now eastern Turkey and spread through the Fertile Crescent.
Settlement at Göbekli Tepe began around 9500 BC and may have the world's oldest temple.
The Nile River Valley has evidence of sorghum and millet cultivation starting around 8000 BC and agricultural use of yams in Western Africa perhaps dates to the same time period.
Cultivation of millet, rice, and legumes began around 7000 BC in China.
Taro cultivation in New Guinea dates to about 7000 BC also with squash cultivation in Mesoamerica perhaps sharing that date.
Animal domestication began with the domestication of dogs, which dates to at least 15,000 years ago, and perhaps even earlier.
Sheep and goats were domesticated around 9000 BC in the Fertile Crescent, alongside the first evidence for agriculture.
Other animals, such as pigs and poultry, were later domesticated and used as food sources.
Cattle and water buffalo were domesticated around 7000 BC and horses, donkeys, and camels were domesticated by about 4000 BC.
All of these animals were used not only for food, but to carry and pull people and loads, greatly increasing human ability to do work.
The invention of the simple plough by 6000 BC further increased agricultural efficiency.
Metal use in the form of hammered copper items predates the discovery of smelting of copper ores, which happened around 6000 BC in western Asia and independently in eastern Asia before 2000 BC.
Gold and silver use dates to between 6000 and 5000 BC.
Alloy metallurgy began with bronze in about 3500 BC in Mesopotamia and was developed independently in China by 2000 BC.
Pottery developed independently throughout the world, with fired pots appearing first among the Jomon of Japan and in West Africa at Mali.
Sometime between 5000 and 4000 BC the potter's wheel was invented.
By 3000 BC, the pottery wheel was adapted into wheeled vehicles which could be used to carry loads further and easier than with human or animal power alone.
Writing developed separately in five different locations in human history: Mesopotamia, Egypt, India, China, and Mesoamerica.
By 3400 BC, "proto-literate" cuneiform spread in the Middle East.
Egypt developed its own system of hieroglyphs by about 3200 BC.
By 2800 BC the Indus Valley Civilisation had developed its Indus script, which remains undeciphered.
Chinese Characters were independently developed in China during the Shang dynasty in the form of the Oracle Bone Script dating to the period 1600 to 1100 BC.
Writing in Mesoamerica dates to 600 BC with the Zapotec civilization.
The ancient Near East is considered the cradle of civilisation.
It was the first to practice intensive year-round agriculture; created one of the first coherent writing systems, invented the potter's wheel and then the vehicular wheel, created the first centralised governments, law codes and empires, as well as displaying social stratification, slavery, and organized warfare.
It began the study of the stars and the sciences of astronomy and mathematics.
Mesopotamia is the site of some of the earliest known civilisations in the world.
Agricultural communities emerged in the area with the Halaf culture around 8000 BC and continued to expand through the Ubaid period around 6000 BC.
Cities began in the Uruk period (4000–3100 BC) and expanded during the Jemdet Nasr (3100–2900 BC) and Early Dynastic (2900–2350 BC) periods.
The surplus of storable foodstuffs created by this economy allowed the population to settle in one place instead of migrating after crops and herds.
It also allowed for a much greater population density, and in turn required an extensive labour force and division of labour.
This organisation led to the necessity of record keeping and the development of writing.
Babylonia was an Amorite state in lower Mesopotamia (modern southern Iraq), with Babylon as its capital.
Babylonia emerged when Hammurabi created an empire out of the territories of the former kingdoms of Sumer and Akkad.
The Neo-Babylonian Empire, or Chaldea, was Babylonia from the 7th and 6th centuries BC.
Under the reign of Nebuchadnezzar II, it conquered Jerusalem.
This empire also created the Hanging Gardens of Babylon and the still-surviving Ishtar Gate as architectural embellishments of its capital at Babylon.
Akkad was a city and its surrounding region near Babylon.
Akkad also became the capital of the Akkadian Empire.
Despite an extensive search, the precise site has never been found.
Akkad reached the height of its power between about 2330 and 2150 BC, following the conquests of King Sargon of Akkad.
Through the spread of Sargon's empire, the language of Akkad, known as Akkadian from the city, spread and replaced the Sumerian language in Mesopotamia and eventually by 1450 BC was the main language of diplomacy in the Near East.
Assyria was originally a region on the Upper Tigris, where a small state was created in the 19th century BC.
The capital was at Assur, which gave the state its name.
Later, as a nation and empire that came to control all of the Fertile Crescent, Egypt, and much of Anatolia, the term "Assyria proper" referred to roughly the northern half of Mesopotamia (the southern half being Babylonia), with Nineveh as its capital.
The Assyrian kings controlled a large kingdom at three different times in history.
These are called the Old (20th to 18th centuries BC), Middle (14th to 11th centuries BC), and Neo-Assyrian (9th to 7th centuries BC) kingdoms, or periods.
Mitanni was a Hurrian empire in northern Mesopotamia founded around 1500 BC.
The Mitanians conquered and controlled Assyria until the 14th century BC while contending with Egypt for control of parts of modern Syria.
Its capital was Washukanni, whose precise location has not been determined by archaeologists.
The Medes and Persians were peoples who had appeared in the Iranian plateau around 1500 BC.
Both peoples spoke Indo-European languages and were mostly pastoralists with a tradition of horse archery.
The Medes established their own Median Empire by the 6th century BC, having defeated the Neo-Assyrian Empire with the Chaldeans in 614 BC.
The Achaemenid Empire was founded by Cyrus the Great, who first became king of the Persians, then conquered the Medes, Lydia, and Babylon by 539 BC.
The empire built on earlier Mesopotamian systems of government to govern their large empire.
By building roads, they improved both the ability to send governmental instructions throughout their lands as well as improving the ability of their military forces to be deployed rapidly.
Increased trade and upgraded farming techniques increased wealth, but also exacerbated inequalities between social classes.
The empire's location at the centre of trading networks spread its intellectual and philosophical ideas throughout a wide area, and its religion, while not itself spreading far, had an impact on later religions such as Christianity, Islam, and Judaism.
Cyrus' son Cambyses II conquered Egypt, while a later emperor, Darius the Great, expanded the empire to the Indus River, creating the largest empire in the world to that date.
But Darius and his son Xerxes I failed to expand into Greece, with expeditions in 490 and 480 BC eventually failing.
The Achaemenid dynasty and empire fell to Alexander the Great by 330 BC, and after Alexander's death, much of the area previously ruled by the Cyrus and his successors was ruled by the Seleucid dynasty.
Parthia was an Iranian civilisation situated in the northeastern part of modern Iran.
Their power was based on a combination of military power based on heavy cavalry with a decentralised governing structure based on a federated system.
The Parthian Empire was led by the Arsacid dynasty, which by around 155 BC under Mithradates I had mostly conquered the Seleucid Empire.
Parthia had many wars with the Romans, but it was rebellions within the empire that ended it in the 3rd century AD.
The Sasanian Empire began when the Parthian Empire ended in AD 224.
Their rulers claimed the Achaemenids as ancestors and set up their capital at Ctesiphon in Mesopotamia.
Their period of greatest military expansion occurred under Shapur I, who by the time of his death in AD 272 had defeated Roman imperial armies and set up buffer states between the Sasanians and Roman Empires.
After Shapur, the Sasanians were under more pressure from the Kushans to their east as well as the Roman then Byzantine Empire to its west.
However, the Sasanians rebuilt and founded numerous cities and their merchants travelled widely and introduced crops such as sugar, rice, and cotton into the Iranian plateau.
But in AD 651, the last Sassanid emperor was killed by the expanding Islamic Arabs.
The Hittites first came to Anatolia about 1900 BC and during the period 1600–1500 they expanded into Mesopotamia where they adopted the cuneiform script to their Indo-European language.
By 1200 their empire stretched to Phoenicia and eastern Anatolia.
They improved two earlier technologies from Mesopotamia and spread these new techniques widely – improved iron working and light chariots with spoked wheels in warfare.
The Hittites introduced the casting of iron with molds and then hammering it which enabled weapons and tools to be made stronger and also cheaper.
Although chariots had been used previously, the use of spoked wheels allowed the chariots to be much lighter and more maneuverable.
In 1274 BC the Hittites clashed with the Egyptians at the Battle of Kadesh, where both sides claimed victory.
In 1207 BC the Hittite capital of Hattusa was sacked, ending the Hittite Empire.
Israel and Judah were related Iron Age kingdoms of the ancient Levant and had existed during the Iron Ages and the Neo-Babylonian, Persian and Hellenistic periods.
The name Israel first appears in the stele of the Egyptian pharaoh Merneptah around 1209 BC.
This "Israel" was a cultural and probably political entity of the central highlands, well enough established to be perceived by the Egyptians as a possible challenge to their hegemony, but an ethnic group rather than an organised state.
Israel had emerged by the middle of the 9th century BC, when the Assyrian King Shalmaneser III named "Ahab the Israelite" among his enemies at the battle of Qarqar (853).
Judah emerged somewhat later than Israel, probably during the 9th century BC, but the subject is one of considerable controversy.
Israel came into conflict with the Assyrians, who conquered Israel in 722 BC.
The Neo-Babylonian Empire did the same to Judah in 586.
After both conquests, the conquering forces deported many of the inhabitants to other regions of their respective empires.
Following the fall of Babylon to the Persian Empire, Cyrus the Great allowed the rebuilding of the temple at Jerusalem, and some of the exiles from Judah returned to Judea, where they remained under Persian rule until the Maccabean revolt led to independence during Hellenistic period until Roman conquest.
Phoenicia was an ancient civilisation centred in the north of ancient Canaan, with its heartland along the coastal regions of modern-day Lebanon, Syria and Israel.
Phoenician civilisation was an enterprising maritime trading culture that spread across the Mediterranean between the period of 1550 to 300 BC.
One Phoenician colony, Carthage, ruled an empire in the Western Mediterranean until being defeated by Rome in the Punic Wars.
The Phoenicians invented the Phoenician alphabet, the forerunner of the modern alphabet still in use today.
The history of Pre-Islamic Arabia before the rise of Islam in the AD 630s is not known in great detail.
Archaeological exploration in the Arabian Peninsula has been sparse; indigenous written sources are limited to the many inscriptions and coins from southern Arabia.
Existing material consists primarily of written sources from other traditions (such as Egyptians, Greeks, Persians, Romans, etc.
A number of small kingdoms existed in Arabia from around AD 100 to perhaps about AD 400.
Ancient Egypt was a long-lived civilisation geographically located in north-eastern Africa.
It was concentrated along the middle to lower reaches of the Nile River, reaching its greatest extent during the 2nd millennium BC, which is referred to as the New Kingdom period.
It reached broadly from the Nile Delta in the north, as far south as Jebel Barkal at the Fourth Cataract of the Nile.
Extensions to the geographical range of ancient Egyptian civilisation included, at different times, areas of the southern Levant, the Eastern Desert and the Red Sea coastline, the Sinai Peninsula, and the Western Desert (focused on the several oases).
Ancient Egypt developed over at least three and a half millennia.
It began with the incipient unification of Nile Valley polities around 3100 BC, traditionally under Menes.
The civilisation of ancient Egypt was characterised primarily by intensive agricultural use of the fertile Nile Valley; the use of the Nile itself for transportation; the development of writing systems – first hieroglyphs and then later hieratic and other derived scripts – and literature; the organisation of collective projects such as the pyramids; trade with surrounding regions; and a polytheistic religious tradition that included elaborate funeral customs including mummification.
Overseeing these activities were a socio-political and economic elite under the figure of a (semi)-divine ruler from a succession of ruling dynasties.
Ancient Egyptian history is divided across various periods, beginning with the Old Kingdom, which saw pyramid building on a large scale.
After 2100 BC, the Old Kingdom dissolved into smaller states during the First Intermediate Period, which lasted about 100 years.
The Middle Kingdom began around 2000 BC with the reunification of Egypt under pharoes ruling from Thebes.
The Middle Kingdom ended with the conquest of northern Egypt by the Hyksos around 1650 BC.
The Hyksos were expelled from Egypt and the land was reunited in the New Kingdom around 1550 BC.
This period lasted until about 1000 BC, and saw Egypt expand its borders into Palestine and Syria.
The Third Intermediate Period was marked by the rule of priests as well as the conquest of Egypt by Nubian kings and then later Assyria, Persia, and Macedonians.
Carthage was founded around 814 BC by Phoenician settlers.
Ancient Carthage was a city-state that ruled an empire through alliances and trade influence that stretched throughout North Africa and modern Spain.
At the height of the city's influence, its empire included most of the western Mediterranean.
The empire was in a constant state of struggle with the Roman Republic, which led to a series of conflicts known as the Punic Wars.
After the third and final Punic War, Carthage was destroyed and then occupied by Roman forces.
Nearly all of the territory held by Carthage fell into Roman hands.
The Ta-Seti kingdom in Nubia to the south of Egypt was conquered by Egyptian rulers around 3100 BC, but by 2500 BC the Nubians had created a new kingdom further south, known as the Kingdom of Kush, centred on the upper Nile with a capital at Kerma.
In the Egyptian New Kingdom period, Kush once more was conquered by Egypt.
However, by 1100 BC a new kingdom of Kush had formed, with a capital at Napata.
Nubian rulers conquered Egypt around 760 BC and retained control for about a century.
The Kingdom of Aksum was an important trading nation in northeastern Africa centred in present-day Eritrea and northern Ethiopia, it existed from approximately AD 100 to 940, growing from the Iron Age proto-Aksumite period around the 4th century BC to achieve prominence by the 1st century AD.
The Kingdom of Aksum at its height by the early 6th-century AD extended through much of modern Ethiopia and across the Red Sea to Arabia.
The capital city of the empire was Aksum, now in northern Ethiopia.
The Nok culture appeared in Nigeria around 1000 BC and mysteriously vanished around AD 200.
The civilisation's social system is thought to have been highly advanced.
The Nok civilisation was considered to be the earliest sub-Saharan producer of life-sized Terracotta which have been discovered by archaeologists.
The Nok also used iron smelting that may have been independently developed.
The civilisation of Djenné-Djenno was located in the Niger River Valley in the country of Mali and is considered to be among the oldest urbanised centres and the best-known archaeology site in sub-Saharan Africa.
This archaeological site is located about 3 kilometers (1.
The site is believed to exceed 33 hectares (82 acres); however, this is yet to be confirmed with extensive survey work.
With the help of archaeological excavations mainly by Susan and Roderick McIntosh, the site is known to have been occupied from 250 BC to AD 900.
The city is believed to have been abandoned and moved where the current city is located due to the spread of Islam and the building of the Great Mosque of Djenné.
Previously, it was assumed that advanced trade networks and complex societies did not exist in the region until the arrival of traders from Southwest Asia.
However, sites such as Djenné-Djenno disprove this, as these traditions in West Africa flourished long before.
Towns similar to that at Djenne-Jeno also developed at the site of Dia, also in Mali along the Niger River, from around 900 BC.
Dhar Tichitt and Oualata were prominent among the early urban centres, dated to 2000 BC, in present-day Mauritania.
About 500 stone settlements littered the region in the former savannah of the Sahara.
Its inhabitants fished and grew millet.
It has been found that the Soninke of the Mandé peoples were responsible for constructing such settlements.
Around 300 BC, the region became more desiccated and the settlements began to decline, most likely relocating to Koumbi Saleh.
From the type of architecture and pottery, it is believed that Tichit was related to the subsequent Ghana Empire.
Old Jenne (Djenne) began to be settled around 300 BC, producing iron and with sizeable population, evidenced in crowded cemeteries.
The inhabitants and creators of these settlements during these periods are thought to have been ancestors of the Soninke people.
Peoples speaking precursors to the modern-day Bantu languages began to spread throughout southern Africa, and by 2000 BC they were expanding past the Congo River and into the Great Lakes area.
By AD 1000 these groups had spread throughout all of southern Africa south of the equator.
Iron metallurgy and agriculture spread along with these peoples, with the cultivation of millet, oil palms, sorghum, and yams as well as the use of domesticated cattle, pigs, and sheep.
These technologies helped increase population, and settled communities became common in sub-Saharan Africa except in deserts or heavy forests.
Paleolithic tools have been discovered in India dating to 200,000 years ago, and Neolithic sites are known from near the Indus Valley dating to around 8000 BC.
Agriculture began in the Indus Valley around 7000 BC, and reached the Ganges Valley by 3000 BC.
Barley, cotton, and wheat were grown and the population had domesticated cattle, goats, and sheep.
The Indus Valley Civilisation developed around 3000 BC in the Indus and Ghaggar-Hakra river valleys of north-east Afghanistan, Pakistan, and western India.
Another name for this civilisation is Harappan, after the first of its cities to be excavated, Harappa (now in the Pakistani province of Punjab).
Harappan civilisation grew out of the earlier agricultural communities as they evolved into cities.
These communities created and traded jewelry, figurines, and seals that appear widely scattered throughout Mesopotamia, Afghanistan, and Iran.
Chickens were domesticated in addition to the earlier crops and animals.
They developed their own writing system, the Indus Valley script, which is still mostly undeciphered.
The exact structure of society and the way the cities were governed is not known.
By about 1600 BC, the Indus Valley culture had abandoned many of their cities, including Mohenjo-Daro.
The exact reason for this decline is not known.
Indo-European speaking peoples began to spread into India about 1500 BC.
The Rigveda, in Sanskrit, dates to this period and begins a period often known as the Vedic period.
Between 1500 and 500 BC these peoples spread throughout most of India and had begun to found small cities.
Vedic society was characterised by the varna system which divided society into four broad castes, which were later elaborated.
By the end of the Vedic period, this way of organising society had become central to Indian society.
Religion in the late Vedic period was evolving into Hinduism, which spread throughout Southeast Asia.
Siddhartha Gautama, born around 560 BC in northern India, went on to found a new religion based on his ascetic life – Buddhism.
This faith also spread throughout Eastern and Southeastern Asia after his death.
This period also saw the composition of the epics Ramayana and Mahabharata.
The kingdom of Magadha rose to prominence under a number of dynasties that peaked in power under the reign of Ashoka Maurya, one of India's most legendary and famous emperors.
During the reign of Ashoka, the four dynasties of Chola, Chera, and Pandya were ruling in the South, while Devanampiya Tissa (250–210 BC) controlled Anuradhapura (now Sri Lanka).
These kingdoms, while not part of Ashoka's empire, were in friendly terms with the Maurya Empire.
An alliance existed between Devanampiya Tissa and Ashoka of India, who sent Buddhist missionaries to Sri Lanka.
Most of North India was reunited under the Gupta Empire beginning under Chandragupta I around AD 320.
Under his successors the empire spread to include much of India except for the Deccan Plateau and the very south of the peninsula.
This was a period of relative peace, and the Gupta rulers generally left administration in local rulers.
The Gupta Empire was weakened and ultimately ruined by the raids of Hunas (a branch of the Hephthalites emanating from Central Asia), and the empire broke up into smaller regional kingdoms by the end of the fifth century AD.
India would remain fragmented into smaller states until the rise of the Mughal Empire in the 1500s.
The Neolithic period of Southeast Asia was characterised by several migrations into Mainland and Island Southeast Asia from southern China by Austronesian, Austroasiatic, Kra-Dai, and Hmong–Mien speakers.
Territorial principalities in both Insular and Mainland Southeast Asia, characterised as "agrarian kingdoms", developed an economy by around 500 BC based on surplus crop cultivation and moderate coastal trade of domestic natural products.
Several states of the Malayan-Indonesian "thalassian" zone shared these characteristics with Indochinese polities like the Pyu city-states in the Irrawaddy River valley, the Văn Lang kingdom in the Red River Delta and Funan around the lower Mekong.
Văn Lang, founded in the 7th century BC, endured until 258 BC under the Hồng Bàng dynasty, as part of the Đông Sơn culture that sustained a dense and organised population that produced an elaborate Bronze Age industry.
Intensive wet-rice cultivation in an ideal climate enabled the farming communities to produce a regular crop surplus that was used by the ruling elite to raise, command and pay work forces for public construction and maintenance projects such as canals and fortifications.
The earliest known evidence of copper and bronze production in Southeast Asia was found at Ban Chiang in north-east Thailand and among the Phùng Nguyên culture of northern Vietnam around 2000 BC.
The Đông Sơn culture established a tradition of bronze production and the manufacture of evermore refined bronze and iron objects, such as plows, axes and sickles with shaft holes, socketed arrows and spearheads and small ornamented items.
By about 500 BC, large and delicately decorated bronze drums of remarkable quality, weighing more than 70 kg (150 lb), were produced in the laborious lost-wax casting process.
This industry of highly sophisticated metal processing was developed independent of Chinese or Indian influence.
Historians relate these achievements to the presence of organised, centralised and hierarchical communities and a large population.
Between 1000 BC and 100 AD, the Sa Huỳnh culture flourished along the south-central coast of Vietnam.
Ceramic jar burial sites that included grave goods have been discovered at various sites along the entire territory.
Among large, thin-walled terracotta jars, ornamented and colorized cooking pots, glass items, jade earrings and metal objects were deposited near the rivers and along the coast.
Around 3000 to 1500 BC, a large-scale migration of Austronesians, known as the Austronesian expansion began from Taiwan.
Population growth primarily fuelled this migration.
These first settlers settled in northern Luzon, in the archipelago of the Philippines, intermingling with the earlier Australo-Melanesian population who had inhabited the islands since about 23,000 years earlier.
Over the next thousand years, Austronesian peoples migrated southeast to the rest of the Philippines, and into the islands of the Celebes Sea and Borneo.
From southwestern Borneo, Austronesians spread further west in a single migration event to both Sumatra and the coastal regions of southern Vietnam, becoming the ancestors of the speakers of the Malayic and Chamic branches of the Austronesian language family.
Soon after reaching the Philippines, Austronesians colonised the Northern Mariana Islands by 1500 BC or even earlier, becoming the first humans to reach Remote Oceania.
The Chamorro migration was also unique in that it was the only Austronesian migration to the Pacific Islands to successfully retain rice cultivation.
Palau and Yap were settled by separate voyages by 1000 BC.
Another important migration branch was by the Lapita culture, which rapidly spread into the islands off the coast of northern New Guinea and into the Solomon Islands and other parts of coastal New Guinea and Island Melanesia by 1200 BC.
They reached the islands of Fiji, Samoa, and Tonga by around 900 to 800 BC.
This remained the furthest extent of the Austronesian expansion into Polynesia until around 700 AD, when there was another surge of island colonisation.
It reached the Cook Islands, Tahiti, and the Marquesas by 700 AD; Hawaii by 900 AD; Rapa Nui by 1000 AD; and New Zealand by 1200 AD.
For a few centuries, the Polynesian islands were connected by bidirectional long-distance sailing, with the exception of Rapa Nui, which had limited further contact due to its isolated geographical location.
Island groups like the Pitcairns, the Kermadec Islands, and the Norfolk Islands were also formerly settled by Austronesians but later abandoned.
There is also putative evidence, based in the spread of the sweet potato, that Austronesians may have reached South America from Polynesia, where they might have traded with the Indigenous peoples of the Americas.
Austronesians established prehistoric maritime trade networks in Island Southeast Asia, including the Maritime Jade Road, a jade trade network, in Southeast Asia which existed in Taiwan and the Philippines from 2000 BC to 1000 AD.
The trade was established by links between the indigenous peoples of Taiwan and the Philippines, and later included parts of Vietnam, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, and other areas in Southeast Asia (known as the Sa Huynh-Kalanay Interaction Sphere).
Lingling-o artefacts are among the notable archaeological finds originating from the Maritime Jade Road.
During the operation of the Maritime Jade Road, the Austronesian spice trade networks were also established by Islander Southeast Asians with Sri Lanka and Southern India by around 1000 to 600 BC.
They also established early long-distance contacts with Africa, possibly as early as before 500 BC, based on such archaeological evidence as banana phytoliths in Cameroon and Uganda and remains of Neolithic chicken bones in Zanzibar.
An Austronesian group, originally from the Makassar Strait region around Kalimantan and Sulawesi, eventually settled Madagascar, either directly from Southeast Asia or from preexisting mixed Austronesian-Bantu populations from East Africa.
Estimates for when this occurred vary from the 1st century AD to as late as the 6th to 7th centuries AD.
It is likely that the Austronesians that settled Madagascar followed a coastal route through South Asia and East Africa, rather than directly across the Indian Ocean.
Genetic evidence suggests that some individuals of Austronesian descent reached Africa and the Arabian Peninsula.
By around the 2nd century BC, the Neolithic Austronesian jade and spice trade networks in Southeast Asia connected with the maritime trade routes of South Asia, the Middle East, eastern Africa, and the Mediterranean, becoming what is now known as the Maritime Silk Road.
Prior to the 10th century, the eastern part of the route was primarily used by Southeast Asian Austronesian traders using distinctive lashed-lug ships, although Tamil and Persian traders also sailed the western parts of the routes.
It allowed the exchange of goods from East and Southeast Asia on one end, all the way to Europe and eastern Africa on the other.
Srivijaya, an Austronesian polity founded at Palembang in 682 AD, rose to dominate the trade in the region around the straits of Malacca and Sunda and the South China Sea emporium by controlling the trade in luxury aromatics and Buddhist artefacts from West Asia to a thriving Tang market.
It emerged through the conquest and subjugation of neighbouring thalassocracies.
These included Melayu, Kedah, Tarumanagara, and Mataram, among others.
These polities controlled the sea lanes in Southeast Asia and exploited the spice trade of the Spice Islands, as well as maritime trade-routes between India and China.
The Chinese civilisation that emerged within the Yellow River valley is one of earliest civilisations in the world.
Prior to the formation of civilisation, neolithic cultures such as the Longshan and Yangshao dating to 5000 BC produced sophisticated pottery, cultivated millet, and likely produced clothes woven from hemp and silk.
Rice was also farmed and pigs and water buffalo were kept for food.
Longshan potters may have used the pottery wheel to produce their wares.
Ancient Chinese traditions described three ancient dynasties that predated the unification under the Qin and Han dynasties.
These were the Xia, the Shang, and the Zhou.
It was not until the later 20th century that many historians considered the Shang or Xia to be anything other than legendary.
Little is yet known about the Xia, which appears to have begun around 2200 BC, and may have controlled parts of the Yangtze River valley.
The Shang dynasty traditionally is dated to 1766 to 1122 BC.
Bronze was central to Shang culture and technology, with chariots and bronze weapons helping to expand Shang control over northern China.
The cities at Ao and Yinxu, near Anyang, have been excavated and city walls, royal palaces, and archives as well as tombs and workshops were found.
A system of writing developed, beginning with oracle bones, of which over 100,000 are still extant.
Towards the end of the 2nd millennium BC, the Shang were overrun by the Zhou dynasty from the Wei River valley to the west.
The Zhou rulers at this time invoked the concept of the Mandate of Heaven to legitimize their rule, a concept that would be influential for almost every successive dynasty.
The Zhou initially established their capital in the west near modern Xi'an, near the Yellow River, but they would preside over a series of expansions into the Yangtze River valley.
Zhou administration was decentralised, with local elites responsible for collecting tribute and providing military support to the Zhou rulers.
In the 8th century BC, power became decentralized during the Spring and Autumn period, named after the influential Spring and Autumn Annals.
In this period, local military leaders used by the Zhou began to assert their power and vie for hegemony.
The situation was aggravated by the invasion of other peoples, forcing the Zhou to move their capital east to Luoyang.
In each of the hundreds of states that eventually arose, local strongmen held most of the political power and continued their subservience to the Zhou kings in name only.
The Hundred Schools of Thought of Chinese philosophy blossomed during this period, and such influential intellectual movements as Confucianism, Taoism, Legalism and Mohism were founded, partly in response to the changing political world.
After further political consolidation, seven prominent states remained by the end of the 5th century BC, and the years in which these few states battled each other is known as the Warring States period.
Though there remained a nominal Zhou king until 256 BC, he was largely a figurehead and held little power.
As neighboring territories of these warring states, including areas of modern Sichuan and Liaoning, were annexed by the growing power of the rulers of Qin, they were governed under the new local administrative system of commandery.
The final expansion in this period began during the reign of Ying Zheng, the king of Qin.
His unification of the other six powers, and further annexations to the south and southeast by 213 BC enabled him to proclaim himself the First Emperor (Qin Shi Huangdi).
Qin Shi Huangdi ruled the unified China directly with absolute power.
In contrast to the decentralised and feudal rule of earlier dynasties the Qin ruled directly.
Nationwide the philosophy of legalism was enforced and publications promoting rival ideas such as Confucianism were prohibited.
In his reign unified China created the first continuous Great Wall with the use of forced labour.
Invasions were launched southward to annex Vietnam.
The Qin period also saw the standardisation of the Chinese writing system and the government unified the legal systems as well as setting standardised units of measurement throughout the empire.
After the emperor's death rebellions began and the Han dynasty took power and ruled China for over four centuries with a brief interruption from AD 9 to 23.
The Han dynasty promoted the spread of iron agricultural tools, which helped create a food surplus that led to a large growth of population during the Han period.
Silk production also increased and the manufacture of paper was invented.
Though the Han enjoyed great military and economic success, it was strained by the rise of aristocrats who disobeyed the central government.
Public frustration provoked the Yellow Turban Rebellion; though a failure it nonetheless accelerated the empire's downfall.
After AD 208, the Han dynasty broke up into rival kingdoms.
China would remain divided for almost the next 400 years.
The East Asian nations adjacent to China were all profoundly influenced by their interactions with Chinese civilisation.
Northwestern Korea and Northern Vietnam were brought under Han rule by Han Wudi in the second century BC, and this rule led to cultural influences on both areas for many centuries to come.
Wudi also faced a threat from the Xiongnu, a nomadic people from the Central Asian steppes.
Wudi's invasions ended the Xiongnu state.
In 108 BC, the Han dynasty of China conquered much of northern Korea but when Han China began its decline, three kingdoms in Korea – those of Baekje, Goguryeo and Silla – emerged and expelled the Chinese.
Goguryeo and Baekje were eventually destroyed by a Tang dynasty and Silla alliance.
Silla then drove out the Tang dynasty in 676 to control most of the Korean peninsula undisputed.
Jomon culture formed in Japan before 500 BC and under Chinese influence became the Yayoi culture which built large tombs by AD 200.
In the 300s, a kingdom formed in the Yamato plain, perhaps influenced by Korean refugees.
In pre-Columbian times, several large, centralised ancient civilisations developed in the Western Hemisphere, both in Mesoamerica and western South America.
Beyond these areas, the use of agriculture expanded East of the Andes Mountains in South America particularly with the Marajoara culture, and in the continental United States.
Ancient Andean civilisation began with the rise of organised fishing communities from 3500 BC onwards.
Along with a sophisticated maritime society came the construction of large monuments, which likely existed as community centres.
The peoples of this area grew beans, cotton, peanuts, and sweet potatoes, fished in the ocean, and by about 2000 BC had added the potato to their crops.
The Chavin culture, based around the Chavin cult, emerged around 1000 BC and led to large temples and artworks as well as sophisticated textiles.
Gold, silver, and copper were worked for jewelry and occasionally for small copper tools.
After the decline of Chavin culture, a number of cities formed after about 200 BC.
The cities at Huari, Pucara, and Tiahuanaco were all likely over 10,000 residents.
From about AD 300, the Mochica culture arose along the Moche River.
These people left painted pottery depicting their society and culture with a wide range of varied subjects.
Besides the Mochica, there were a number of other large states in the Andes after about AD 100.
Included amongst these are the Nazca culture, who were mainly village-dwelling but left behind a large ceremonial centre at Cahuachi as well as the Nazca lines, a large number of huge designs set into the desert floor.
Agricultural cultivation began around 8000 BC in Mesoamerica, where avocados, beans, chili peppers, gourds, and squashes were grown from about 7000 BC.
Around 4000 BC maize began to be grown, and soon after this tomatoes.
Settlements appeared around 3000 BC and by 2000 BC most of Mesoamerica was practicing agriculture.
Although some animals were domesticated — notably turkeys and dogs — the lack of suitable large animals precluded the development of animals used for transportation or labour.
Around 1200 BC the first Olmec centre of San Lorenzo was founded, which remained the centre of Olmec civilisation until around 800 BC when La Venta took over before losing primacy to Tres Zapotes around 400 BC.
These and other Olmec centres were groups of tombs, temples, and other ceremonial sites built of stone.
Their construction testifies to the complexity of Olmec society, although the exact nature of how they were governed is not known.
They also erected large stone sculptures of human heads and other subjects.
Jade jewelry and other Olmec objects are found throughout Mesoamerica, likely having travelled via trade networks.
The Olmec writing system was mainly used for recording their calendar, both of which influenced later Mesoamerican cultures.
After the decline of the Olmecs, other civilisations in Mesoamerica either arose or emerged from the Olmec shadow - the Mayans, the Zapotecs, and Teotihuacan.
The Zapotecs began around 500 BC in the Oaxaca Valley at the site of Monte Alban.
Monte Alban grew to around 25,000 residents in the period around AD 200, with the city having large stone temples and an expansive stone plaza.
Like the Olmecs, they had a writing system and calendar.
But by AD 900 Monte Alban was deserted for unknown reasons.
Teotihuacan developed around AD 200 and centred on the city of Teotihuacan, which grew to perhaps as many as 200,000 inhabitants at its height.
Teotihuacan lasted until around AD 700, when it was burned and vandalised.
Maya culture began to emerge around AD 300 in the Yucatan Peninsula and modern-day Guatemala.
During the 600 years of the Classical Maya period, more than 80 Mayan sites were built, with temples, pyramids, and palaces the focal point of each centre.
The most influential was Tikal, but Mayan civilisation was based on city-states which often were at war with each other.
This seems not to have restricted trade, which went on between the cities.
A priestly elite kept astronomical and calendrical knowledge, recording it with a writing system based on the Olmec system of glyphs.
History, poetry, and other records were recorded in books, most of which did not survive the Spanish conquest of Mesoamerica.
Mathematics was also studied, and they used the concept of zero in their calculations.
The Mayan civilisation began to decline about AD 800, and most of its cities were deserted soon afterwards.
Organized societies, in the ancient United States or Canada, were often mound builder civilisations.
One of the most significant of these was the Poverty Point culture that existed in the U.
The Mississippi River was a core area in the development of long-distance trade and culture.
Following Poverty Point, successive complex cultures such as the Hopewell emerged in the Southeastern United States in the Early Woodland period.
Before AD 500 many mound builder societies retained a hunter gatherer form of subsistence.
Greece is home to the first advanced civilizations in Europe beginning with the Cycladic culture on the islands of the Aegean Sea around 3200 BC, and the Minoan civilisation in Crete (2700–1500 BC).
The Minoans built large palaces decorated with frescoes and wrote in the undeciphered script known as Linear A.
The Mycenaean civilization, the first distinctively Greek civilisation later emerged on the mainland (1600–1100 BC), consisting of a network of palace-centred states and writing the earliest attested form of Greek with the Linear B script.
The Mycenaeans gradually absorbed the Minoans, but collapsed violently around 1200 BC, along with several other civilizations in the eastern Mediterranean, during the regional event known as the Late Bronze Age collapse.
This ushered in a period known as the Greek Dark Ages, from which written records are absent.
The Archaic Period in Greece is generally considered to have lasted from around the 8th century BC to the invasion by Xerxes in 480 BC.
This period saw the expansion of the Greek world around the Mediterranean, with the founding of Greek city-states as far afield as Sicily in the west and the Black Sea in the east.
Politically, the Archaic period in Greece saw the collapse of the power of the old aristocracies, with democratic reforms in Athens and the development of Sparta's unique constitution.
The end of the Archaic period also saw the rise of Athens, which would come to be a dominant power in the Classical Period, after the reforms of Solon and the tyranny of Pisistratus.
The Classical Greek world was dominated throughout the 5th century BC by the major powers of Athens and Sparta.
Through the Delian League, Athens was able to convert pan-hellenist sentiment and fear of the Persian threat into a powerful empire, and this, along with the conflict between Sparta and Athens culminating in the Peloponnesian War, was the major political development of the first part of the Classical period.
The period in Greek history from the death of Alexander the Great until the rise of the Roman empire and its conquest of Egypt in 30 BC is known as the Hellenistic period.
After Alexander's death, a series of wars between his successors eventually led to three large states being formed from parts of Alexander's conquests, each ruled by a dynasty founded by one of the successors.
These were the Antigonids, the Selucids, and the Ptolemies.
These three kingdoms, along with smaller kingdoms, spread Greek culture and lifestyles into Asia and Egypt.
These varying states eventually were conquered by Rome or the Parthian Empire.
Ancient Rome was a civilisation that grew out of the city-state of Rome, originating as a small agricultural community founded on the Italian peninsula in the 8th century BC, with influences from Greece and other Italian civilisations, such as the Etruscans.
Traditionally Rome was founded as a monarchy that then became a republic.
Rome expanded through the Italian peninsula through a series of wars in the fifth through the third centuries BC.
This expansion brought the Roman republic into conflict with Carthage, leading to a series of Punic Wars, that ended with the destruction of Carthage in 146 BC.
Rome then expanded into Greece and the eastern Mediterranean, while a series of internal conflicts led to the republic becoming an empire ruled by an emperor by the first century AD.
Throughout the first and second centuries AD, the Empire grew slightly while spreading Roman culture throughout its boundaries.
A number of factors led to the eventual decline of the Roman Empire.
The western half of the empire, including Hispania, Gaul, and Italy, eventually broke into independent kingdoms in the 5th century AD; the Eastern Roman Empire, governed from Constantinople, is referred to as the Byzantine Empire after AD 476, the traditional date for the "fall of Rome" and subsequent onset of the Middle Ages.
The Roman Empire underwent considerable social, cultural and organisational change starting with reign of Diocletian, who began the custom of splitting the empire into eastern and western halves ruled by multiple emperors.
Constantine the Great initiated the process of Christianisation of the empire and established a new capital at Constantinople.
Migrations of Germanic tribes disrupted Roman rule from the late 4th century onwards, culminating in the eventual collapse of the empire in the West in 476, replaced by the so-called barbarian kingdoms.
The resultant cultural fusion of Greco-Roman, Germanic and Christian traditions formed the cultural foundations of Europe.
There has been attempt by scholars to connect European late antiquity to other areas in Eurasia.
The Celts were a diverse group of tribal societies in Iron Age Europe.
Proto-Celtic culture formed in the Early Iron Age in Central Europe (Hallstatt period, named for the site in present-day Austria).
By the later Iron Age (La Tène period), Celts had expanded over wide range of lands: as far west as Ireland and the Iberian Peninsula, as far east as Galatia (central Anatolia), and as far north as Scotland.
By the early centuries AD, following the expansion of the Roman Empire and the Great Migrations of Germanic peoples, Celtic culture had become restricted to the British Isles.
The Huns were a nomadic people who formed a large state in Eastern Europe by about AD 400, and under their leader Attila, they fought against both sections of the Roman Empire.
However, after Attila's death, the state fell apart and the Huns' influence in history disappeared.
The Hun-Xiongnu connection is controversial at best and is often disputed but is also not completely discredited.
Migration of Germanic peoples to Britain from what is now northern Germany and southern Scandinavia is attested from the 5th century.
Groups of Goths migrated into western Europe, with the Ostrogoths eventually settling in Italy before being conquered by the Lombards.
A related people, the Visigoths, settled in Spain, founding a kingdom that lasted until it was conquered by Islamic rulers in the AD 700s.
Several Indo-european speaking peoples inhabited the Balkan peninsula including the Thracians and Illyrians, that were divided into many tribes.
The first Illyrian tribe to create its own kingdom was the Enchelei, which formed its own state around the 8th-7th century BC and reached the height of their power under king Bardylis.
The Ardiani were infamous for their piracy and wars against the Roman Empire, for the first time between 229 BC-228 BC, then for a second time during 220 BC-219 BC and for a third time during 168 BC.
The rise of civilisation corresponded with the institutional sponsorship of belief in gods, supernatural forces and the afterlife.
During the Bronze Age, many civilisations adopted their own form of polytheism.
Usually, polytheistic Gods manifested human personalities, strengths and failings.
Early religion was often based on location, with cities or entire countries selecting a deity, that would grant them preferences and advantages over their competitors.
Worship involved the construction of representation of deities, and the granting of sacrifices.
Sacrifices could be material goods, food, or in extreme cases human sacrifice to please a deity.
New philosophies and religions arose in both east and west, particularly about the 6th century BC.
Over time, a great variety of religions developed around the world, with some of the earliest major ones being Hinduism (around 2000 BC), Buddhism (5th century BC), and Jainism (6th century BC) in India, and Zoroastrianism in Persia.
The Abrahamic religions trace their origin to Judaism, around 1700 BC.
In the east, three schools of thought were to dominate Chinese thinking until the modern day.
These were Taoism, Legalism and Confucianism.
The Confucian tradition, which would attain dominance, looked for political morality not to the force of law but to the power and example of tradition.
Confucianism would later spread into the Korean peninsula and Japan.
In the west, the Greek philosophical tradition, represented by Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, was diffused throughout Europe and the Middle East in the 4th century BC by the conquests of Alexander the Great.
After the Bronze and Iron Age religions formed, Christianity spread through the Roman world.
Ancient technological progress began before the recording of history, with tools, use of fire, domestication of animals, and agriculture all predating recorded history.
The use of metals and the ability to make metal alloys was foundational for later technologies to develop.
Medical knowledge, including the use of herbs to treat illnesses and wounds as well as some surgical techniques, advanced during antiquity.
An early very important development that allowed for further advancement was writing, which allowed humans to record information for later use.
The characteristics of ancient Egyptian technology are indicated by a set of artifacts and customs that lasted for thousands of years.
The Egyptians invented and used many basic machines, such as the ramp and the lever, to aid construction processes.
The Egyptians also played an important role in developing Mediterranean maritime technology, including ships.
The Babylonians and Egyptians were early astronomers who recorded their observations of the night sky.
Water managing Qanats which likely emerged on the Iranian plateau and possibly also in the Arabian peninsula sometime in the early 1st millennium BC spread from there slowly west- and eastward.
The Hindu–Arabic numeral system with the concept of zero was developed in India, while modern forms of paper were invented in China in the first century AD.
Ancient History – Academic Info: directory of online resources for the study of ancient history.
Ancient History Resources : Ancient history research links for high school and college students.
In the history of Europe, the Middle Ages or medieval period lasted approximately from the 5th to late 15th centuries, comparable with the post-classical period of global history.
The medieval period is the middle epoch of the three traditional divisions of Western history: classical antiquity, the medieval period, and the modern period.
The medieval period is itself subdivided into the Early, High, and Late Middle Ages.
The Middle Ages began with the fall of the Western Roman Empire and transitioned into the Modern age during the Renaissance, the Reformation, the European wars of religion, and the Age of Discovery.
Early Modernity is a single term adopted to describe this end-stage of the period, during which medieval Europe shades into the modern period.
Population decline, counterurbanisation, the collapse of centralised authority, invasions, and mass migrations of tribes had begun in late antiquity (c.
The large-scale movements of the Migration Period, including various Germanic peoples, formed new kingdoms in what remained of the Western Roman Empire.
In the 7th century, North Africa and the Middle East—once part of the Byzantine Empire—came under the rule of the Umayyad Caliphate, an Islamic empire, after conquest by Muhammad's successors.
Although there were substantial changes in society and political structures, the break with classical antiquity was incomplete.
The still-sizeable Byzantine Empire, Rome's direct continuation, survived in the Eastern Mediterranean and remained a major power.
The empire's law code, the Corpus Juris Civilis or "Code of Justinian", was rediscovered in Northern Italy in the 11th century.
In the West, most kingdoms incorporated the few extant Roman institutions.
Monasteries were founded as campaigns to Christianise the remaining pagans across Europe continued.
The Franks, under the Carolingian dynasty, briefly established the Carolingian Empire during the later 8th and early 9th centuries.
It covered much of Western Europe but later succumbed to the pressures of internal civil wars combined with external invasions: Vikings from the north, Magyars from the east, and Saracens from the south.
During the High Middle Ages, which began after 1000, the population of Europe increased significantly as technological and agricultural innovations allowed trade to flourish and the Medieval Warm Period climate change allowed crop yields to increase.
Manorialism, the organisation of peasants into villages that owed rent and labour services to the nobles, and feudalism, the political structure whereby knights and lower-status nobles owed military service to their overlords in return for the right to rent from lands and manors, were two of the ways society was organised in the High Middle Ages.
This period also saw the collapse of the unified Christian church with the East–West Schism of 1054.
The Crusades, first preached in 1095, were military attempts by Western European Christians to regain control of the Holy Land from Muslims.
Kings became the heads of centralised nation-states, reducing crime and violence but making the ideal of a unified Christendom more distant.
Intellectual life was marked by scholasticism, a philosophy that emphasised joining faith to reason, and by the founding of universities.
The theology of Thomas Aquinas, the paintings of Giotto, the poetry of Dante and Chaucer, the travels of Marco Polo, and the Gothic architecture of cathedrals such as Chartres are among the outstanding achievements toward the end of this period and into the Late Middle Ages.
The Late Middle Ages was marked by difficulties and calamities, including famine, plague, and war, which significantly diminished the population of Europe; between 1347 and 1350, the Black Death killed about a third of Europeans.
Controversy, heresy, and the Western Schism within the Catholic Church paralleled the interstate conflict, civil strife, and peasant revolts that occurred in the kingdoms.
Cultural and technological developments transformed European society, concluding the Late Middle Ages and beginning the early modern period.
The Middle Ages is one of the three major periods in the most enduring scheme for analysing European history: classical civilisation or antiquity, the Middle Ages and the modern period.
The "Middle Ages" first appears in Latin in 1469 as media tempestas or "middle season".
In early usage, there were many variants, including medium aevum, or "middle age", first recorded in 1604, and media saecula, or "middle centuries", first recorded in 1625.
The adjective "medieval" (or sometimes "mediaeval" or "mediæval"), meaning pertaining to the Middle Ages, derives from medium aevum.
Medieval writers divided history into periods such as the "Six Ages" or the "Four Empires" and considered their time to be the last before the end of the world.
When referring to their own times, they spoke of them as being "modern".
In the 1330s, the Italian humanist and poet Petrarch referred to pre-Christian times as antiqua ('ancient') and to the Christian period as nova ('new').
Petrarch regarded the post-Roman centuries as "dark" compared to the "light" of classical antiquity.
Leonardo Bruni was the first historian to use tripartite periodisation in his History of the Florentine People (1442), with a middle period "between the fall of the Roman Empire and the revival of city life sometime in late eleventh and twelfth centuries".
Tripartite periodisation became standard after the 17th-century German historian Christoph Cellarius divided history into three periods: ancient, medieval, and modern.
The most commonly given starting point for the Middle Ages is around 500, with the date of 476 first used by Bruni--mapping to the removal of the last (native) Roman emperor in the West from power and his replacement by a German chieftain.
Later starting dates are sometimes used in the outer parts of Europe.
For Europe as a whole, 1500 is often considered to be the end of the Middle Ages, but there is no universally agreed upon end date.
Depending on the context, events such as the conquest of Constantinople by the Turks in 1453, Christopher Columbus's first voyage to the Americas in 1492, or the Reformation in 1517 are sometimes used.
English historians often use the Battle of Bosworth Field in 1485 to mark the end of the period.
For Spain, dates commonly used are the death of King Ferdinand II in 1516, the death of Queen Isabella I of Castile in 1504, or the conquest of Granada in 1492.
The European Renaissance, the Reformation, and Early Modernity would, in that case, all refer to a transition between the Middle Ages and modernity in Western Europe instead of being counted as their own periods, similar to the way that the fall of the Western Roman Empire (occurring over a period of centuries) marks the beginning of the medieval period.
By the end of the Thirty Years War, this transition has been accomplished in a geopolitical sense and the territory previously known as Christendom begins to be called Europe.
Historians from Romance-speaking countries tend to divide the Middle Ages into two parts: an earlier "High" and later "Low" period.
English-speaking historians, following their German counterparts, generally subdivide the Middle Ages into three intervals: "Early", "High", and "Late".
In the 19th century, the entire Middle Ages were often referred to as the "Dark Ages", but with the adoption of these subdivisions, use of this term was restricted to the Early Middle Ages, at least among historians.
The Roman Empire reached its greatest territorial extent during the 2nd century AD; the following two centuries witnessed the slow decline of Roman control over its outlying territories.
Economic issues, including inflation, and external pressure on the frontiers combined to create the Crisis of the Third Century, with emperors coming to the throne only to be rapidly replaced by new usurpers.
Military expenses increased steadily during the 3rd century, mainly in response to the war with the Sasanian Empire, which revived in the middle of the 3rd century.
The army doubled in size, and cavalry and smaller units replaced the Roman legion as the main tactical unit.
The need for revenue led to increased taxes and a decline in numbers of the curial, or landowning, class, and decreasing numbers of them willing to shoulder the burdens of holding office in their native towns.
More bureaucrats were needed in the central administration to deal with the needs of the army, which led to complaints from civilians that there were more tax-collectors in the empire than tax-payers.
The Emperor Diocletian (r.
In 330, after a period of civil war, Constantine the Great (r.
Diocletian's reforms strengthened the governmental bureaucracy, reformed taxation, and strengthened the army, which bought the empire time but did not resolve the problems it was facing: excessive taxation, a declining birthrate, and pressures on its frontiers, among others.
Civil war between rival emperors became common in the middle of the 4th century, diverting soldiers from the empire's frontier forces and allowing invaders to encroach.
For much of the 4th century, Roman society stabilised in a new form that differed from the earlier classical period, with a widening gulf between the rich and poor, and a decline in the vitality of the smaller towns.
Another change was the Christianisation, or conversion of the empire to Christianity, a gradual process that lasted from the 2nd to the 5th centuries.
In 376, the Goths, fleeing from the Huns, received permission from Emperor Valens (r.
The settlement did not go smoothly, and the Goths began to raid and plunder when Roman officials mishandled the situation.
Valens, attempting to put down the disorder, was killed fighting the Goths at the Battle of Adrianople on 9 August 378.
In addition to the threat from such tribal confederacies in the north, internal divisions within the empire, especially within the Christian Church, caused problems.
In 400, the Visigoths invaded the Western Roman Empire and, although briefly forced back from Italy, in 410 sacked the city of Rome.
In 406 the Alans, Vandals, and Suevi crossed into Gaul; over the next three years they spread across Gaul and in 409 crossed the Pyrenees Mountains into modern-day Spain.
The Migration Period began, when various peoples, initially largely Germanic peoples, moved across Europe.
The Franks, Alemanni, and the Burgundians all ended up in northern Gaul while the Angles, Saxons, and Jutes settled in Britain, and the Vandals went on to cross the strait of Gibraltar after which they conquered the province of Africa.
In the 430s the Huns began invading the empire; their king Attila (r.
The Hunnic threat remained until Attila's death in 453, when the Hunnic confederation he led fell apart.
These invasions by the tribes completely changed the political and demographic nature of what had been the Western Roman Empire.
By the end of the 5th century, the western section of the empire was divided into smaller political units ruled by the tribes that had invaded in the early part of the century.
The deposition of the last emperor of the west, Romulus Augustulus, in 476 has traditionally marked the end of the Western Roman Empire.
By 493 the Italian peninsula was conquered by the Ostrogoths.
The Eastern Roman Empire, often referred to as the Byzantine Empire after the fall of its western counterpart, had little ability to assert control over the lost western territories.
The Byzantine emperors maintained a claim over the territory, but while none of the new kings in the west dared to elevate himself to the position of emperor of the west, Byzantine control of most of the Western Empire could not be sustained; the reconquest of the Mediterranean periphery and the Italian Peninsula (Gothic War) in the reign of Justinian (r.
The political structure of Western Europe changed with the end of the united Roman Empire.
Although the movements of peoples during this period are usually described as "invasions", they were not just military expeditions but migrations of entire peoples into the empire.
Such movements were aided by the refusal of the Western Roman elites to support the army or pay the taxes that would have allowed the military to suppress the migration.
The emperors of the 5th century were often controlled by military strongmen such as Stilicho (d.
When the line of Western emperors ceased, many of the kings who replaced them were from the same background.
Intermarriage between the new kings and the Roman elites was common.
This led to a fusion of Roman culture with the customs of the invading tribes, including the popular assemblies that allowed free male tribal members more say in political matters than was common in the Roman state.
Material artefacts left by the Romans and the invaders are often similar, and tribal items were often modelled on Roman objects.
Much of the scholarly and written culture of the new kingdoms was also based on Roman intellectual traditions.
An important difference was the new polities' gradual loss of tax revenue.
Many new political entities no longer supported their armies through taxes; instead, they relied on granting them land or rents.
This meant there was less need for large tax revenues, so the taxation systems decayed.
Warfare was common between and within the kingdoms.
Slavery declined as the supply weakened, and society became more rural.
Between the 5th and 8th centuries, new peoples and individuals filled the political void left by the centralised Roman government.
The Ostrogoths, a Gothic tribe, settled in Roman Italy in the late fifth century under Theoderic the Great (d.
The Burgundians settled in Gaul, and after an earlier realm was destroyed by the Huns in 436, formed a new kingdom in the 440s.
Between today's Geneva and Lyon, it grew to become the realm of Burgundy in the late 5th and early 6th centuries.
Elsewhere in Gaul, the Franks and Celtic Britons set up small polities.
Francia was centred in northern Gaul, and the first king of whom much is known is Childeric I (d.
His grave was discovered in 1653 and is remarkable for its grave goods, which included weapons and a large quantity of gold.
Under Childeric's son Clovis I (r.
The Britons, related to the natives of Britannia – modern-day Great Britain – settled in what is now Brittany.
Other monarchies were established by the Visigothic Kingdom in the Iberian Peninsula, the Suebi in northwestern Iberia, and the Vandal Kingdom in North Africa.
In the sixth century, the Lombards settled in Northern Italy, replacing the Ostrogothic kingdom with a grouping of duchies that occasionally selected a king to rule over them all.
By the late sixth century, this arrangement had been replaced by a permanent monarchy, the Kingdom of the Lombards.
The invasions brought new ethnic groups to Europe, although some regions received a larger influx of new peoples than others.
In Gaul, for instance, the invaders settled much more extensively in the north-east than in the south-west.
Slavs settled in Central and Eastern Europe and the Balkan Peninsula.
Changes in languages accompanied the settlement of peoples.
Latin, the literary language of the Western Roman Empire, was gradually replaced by vernacular languages, which evolved from Latin but were distinct from it, collectively known as Romance languages.
These changes from Latin to the new languages took many centuries.
Greek remained the language of the Byzantine Empire, but the migrations of the Slavs added Slavic languages to Eastern Europe.
As Western Europe witnessed the formation of new kingdoms, the Eastern Roman Empire remained intact and experienced an economic revival that lasted into the early 7th century.
There were fewer invasions of the eastern section of the empire; most occurred in the Balkans.
Peace with the Sasanian Empire, Rome's traditional enemy, lasted most of the 5th century.
The Eastern Empire was marked by closer relations between the political state and the Christian Church, with doctrinal matters assuming an importance in Eastern politics that they did not have in Western Europe.
Legal developments included the codification of Roman law; the first effort—the Codex Theodosianus—was completed in 438.
Under Emperor Justinian (r.
Justinian also oversaw the construction of the Hagia Sophia in Constantinople and the reconquest of North Africa from the Vandals and Italy from the Ostrogoths, under Belisarius (d.
The conquest of Italy was not complete, as a deadly outbreak of plague in 542 led to the rest of Justinian's reign concentrating on defensive measures rather than further conquests.
At the Emperor's death, the Byzantines had control of most of Italy, North Africa, and a small foothold in southern Spain.
Historians have criticised Justinian's reconquests for overextending his realm and setting the stage for the early Muslim conquests, but many of the difficulties faced by Justinian's successors were due not just to over-taxation to pay for his wars but to the essentially civilian nature of the empire, which made raising troops difficult.
In the Eastern Empire, the Slavs' slow infiltration of the Balkans added further difficulty for Justinian's successors.
It began gradually, but by the late 540s, Slavic tribes were in Thrace and Illyrium and had defeated an imperial army near Adrianople in 551.
In the 560s, the Avars began to expand from their base on the north bank of the Danube; by the end of the 6th century, they were the dominant power in Central Europe and routinely able to force the Eastern emperors to pay tribute.
They remained a strong power until 796.
An additional problem to face the empire came as a result of the involvement of Emperor Maurice (r.
This led to a period of peace, but when Maurice was overthrown, the Persians invaded and during the reign of Emperor Heraclius (r.
In 628, the empire secured a peace treaty and recovered its lost territories.
In Western Europe, some older Roman elite families died out while others became more involved with ecclesiastical than secular affairs.
Values attached to Latin scholarship and education mostly disappeared, and while literacy remained important, it became a practical skill rather than a sign of elite status.
In the 4th century, Jerome (d.
By the 6th century, Gregory of Tours (d.
By the late 6th century, the principal means of religious instruction in the Church had become music and art rather than the book.
Most intellectual efforts went towards imitating classical scholarship, but some original works were created, along with now-lost oral compositions.
The writings of Sidonius Apollinaris (d.
Changes also occurred among laypeople, as aristocratic culture focused on great feasts held in halls rather than on literary pursuits.
Clothing for the elites was richly embellished with jewels and gold.
Lords and kings supported the entourages of fighters who formed the backbone of the military forces.
Family ties within the elites were important, as were the virtues of loyalty, courage, and honour.
These ties led to the prevalence of feuds in aristocratic society, including those related by Gregory of Tours in Merovingian Gaul.
Most feuds seem to have ended quickly with the payment of some compensation.
Women took part in aristocratic society mainly in their roles as wives and mothers of men, with the role of mother of a ruler being especially prominent in Merovingian Gaul.
In Anglo-Saxon society, the lack of many child rulers meant a lesser role for women as queen mothers, but this was compensated for by the increased role played by abbesses of monasteries.
Only in Italy does it appear that women were always considered under the protection and control of a male relative.
Peasant society is much less documented than the nobility.
Most of the surviving information available to historians comes from archaeology; few detailed written records documenting peasant life remain from before the 9th century.
Most of the descriptions of the lower classes come from either law codes or writers from the upper classes.
Landholding patterns in the West were not uniform; some areas had greatly fragmented landholding patterns, but in other areas, large contiguous blocks of land were the norm.
These differences allowed for a wide variety of peasant societies, some dominated by aristocratic landholders and others having great autonomy.
Land settlement also varied greatly.
Some peasants lived in large settlements that numbered as many as 700 inhabitants.
Others lived in small groups of a few families and lived on isolated farms spread over the countryside.
There were also areas where the pattern was a mix of two or more systems.
Unlike in the late Roman period, there was no sharp break between the legal status of the free peasant and the aristocrat, and a free peasant's family could rise into the aristocracy over several generations through military service to a powerful lord.
Roman city life and culture changed greatly in the early Middle Ages.
Although Italian cities remained inhabited, they contracted significantly in size.
For instance, Rome shrank from hundreds of thousands to around 30,000 by the end of the 6th century.
Roman temples were converted into Christian churches and city walls remained in use.
In Northern Europe, cities also shrank, while civic monuments and other public buildings were raided for building materials.
The establishment of new kingdoms often meant some growth for the towns chosen as capitals.
Although there had been Jewish communities in many Roman cities, the Jews suffered periods of persecution after the conversion of the empire to Christianity.
Officially, they were tolerated, if subject to conversion efforts, and were sometimes encouraged to settle in new areas.
Religious beliefs in the Eastern Roman Empire and Iran were in flux during the late sixth and early seventh centuries.
Judaism was an active proselytising faith, and at least one Arab political leader converted to it.
In addition Jewish theologians wrote polemics defending their religion against Christian and Islamic influences.
Christianity had active missions competing with the Persians' Zoroastrianism in seeking converts, especially among residents of the Arabian Peninsula.
All these strands came together with the emergence of Islam in Arabia during the lifetime of Muhammad (d.
After his death, Islamic forces conquered much of the Eastern Roman Empire and Persia, starting with Syria in 634–635, continuing with Persia between 637 and 642, reaching Egypt in 640–641, North Africa in the later seventh century, and the Iberian Peninsula in 711.
By 714, Islamic forces controlled much of the peninsula in a region they called Al-Andalus.
The Islamic conquests reached their peak in the mid-eighth century.
The defeat of Muslim forces at the Battle of Tours in 732 led to the reconquest of southern France by the Franks, but the main reason for the halt of Islamic growth in Europe was the overthrow of the Umayyad Caliphate and its replacement by the Abbasid Caliphate.
The Abbasids moved their capital to Baghdad and were more concerned with the Middle East than Europe, losing control of sections of the Muslim lands.
Umayyad descendants took over the Iberian Peninsula, the Aghlabids controlled North Africa, and the Tulunids became rulers of Egypt.
By the middle of the 8th century, new trading patterns were emerging in the Mediterranean; trade between the Franks and the Arabs replaced the old Roman economy.
Franks traded timber, furs, swords, and enslaved people in return for silks and other fabrics, spices, and precious metals from the Arabs.
The migrations and invasions of the 4th and 5th centuries disrupted trade networks around the Mediterranean.
African goods stopped being imported into Europe, first disappearing from the interior and, by the 7th century, found only in a few cities such as Rome or Naples.
By the end of the 7th century, under the impact of the Muslim conquests, African products were no longer found in Western Europe.
Replacing goods from long-range trade with local products was a trend throughout the old Roman lands in the Early Middle Ages.
This was especially marked in the lands that did not lie on the Mediterranean, such as northern Gaul or Britain.
Non-local goods appearing in the archaeological record are usually luxury goods.
In northern Europe, not only were the trade networks local, but the goods carried were simple, with little pottery or other complex products.
Around the Mediterranean, pottery remained prevalent and appears to have been traded over medium-range networks, not just produced locally.
The various Germanic states in the west all had coinages that imitated existing Roman and Byzantine forms.
Gold continued to be minted until the end of the 7th century in 693–694, when it was replaced by silver in the Merovingian kingdom.
The basic Frankish silver coin was the denarius or denier, while the Anglo-Saxon version was called a penny.
From these areas, the denier or penny spread throughout Europe from 700 to 1000.
Copper or bronze coins were not struck, nor were gold, except in Southern Europe.
No silver coins denominated in multiple units were minted.
Christianity was a major unifying factor between Eastern and Western Europe before the Arab conquests, but the conquest of North Africa sundered maritime connections between those areas.
Increasingly, the Byzantine Church differed in language, practices, and liturgy from the Western Church.
The Eastern Church used Greek instead of Western Latin.
Theological and political differences emerged, and by the early and middle 8th century, issues such as iconoclasm, clerical marriage, and state control of the Church had widened to the extent that the cultural and religious differences were more significant than the similarities.
A formal break known as the East–West Schism came in 1054, when the papacy and the patriarchy of Constantinople clashed over papal supremacy and excommunicated each other, which led to the division of Christianity into two Churches—the Western branch became the Roman Catholic Church and the Eastern branch the Eastern Orthodox Church.
The ecclesiastical structure of the Roman Empire survived the movements and invasions in the West mostly intact.
Still, the papacy was little regarded, and few of the Western bishops looked to the bishop of Rome for religious or political leadership.
Many of the popes before 750 were more concerned with Byzantine affairs and Eastern theological controversies.
The register, or archived copies of the letters, of Pope Gregory the Great (pope 590–604) survived.
Of those 850 letters, most were concerned with affairs in Italy or Constantinople.
The only part of Western Europe where the papacy had influence was Britain, where Gregory had sent the Gregorian mission in 597 to convert the Anglo-Saxons to Christianity.
Irish missionaries were most active in Western Europe between the 5th and the 7th centuries, going first to England and Scotland and then on to the continent.
Under such monks as Columba (d.
The Early Middle Ages witnessed the rise of monasticism in the West.
The shape of European monasticism was determined by traditions and ideas that originated with the Desert Fathers of Egypt and Syria.
Most European monasteries were of the type that focuses on the community experience of the spiritual life, called cenobitism, which was pioneered by Pachomius (d.
Monastic ideals spread from Egypt to Western Europe in the 5th and 6th centuries through hagiographical literature such as the Life of Anthony.
Benedict of Nursia (d.
Monks and monasteries had a profound effect on the religious and political life of the Early Middle Ages, in various cases acting as land trusts for powerful families, centres of propaganda and royal support in newly conquered regions, and bases for missions and proselytisation.
They were the main and sometimes only outposts of education and literacy in a region.
Many of the surviving manuscripts of the Latin classics were copied in monasteries in the Early Middle Ages.
Monks were also the authors of new works, including history, theology, and other subjects, written by authors such as Bede (d.
The Frankish kingdom in northern Gaul split into kingdoms called Austrasia, Neustria, and Burgundy during the 6th and 7th centuries, all of them ruled by the Merovingian dynasty, who were descended from Clovis.
The 7th century was a tumultuous period of wars between Austrasia and Neustria.
Such warfare was exploited by Pippin I (d.
Later, his family inherited the office and acted as advisers and regents.
One of his descendants, Charles Martel (d.
Great Britain was divided into small states dominated by the kingdoms of Northumbria, Mercia, Wessex, and East Anglia which descended from the Anglo-Saxon invaders.
Smaller kingdoms in present-day Wales and Scotland were still under the control of the native Britons and Picts.
Ireland was divided into even smaller political units, usually known as tribal kingdoms, under the control of kings.
There were perhaps as many as 150 local kings in Ireland of varying importance.
The Carolingian dynasty, as the successors to Charles Martel are known, officially took control of the kingdoms of Austrasia and Neustria in a coup of 753 led by Pippin III (r.
A contemporary chronicle claims that Pippin sought and gained authority for this coup from Pope Stephen II (pope 752–757).
Pippin's takeover was reinforced with propaganda that portrayed the Merovingians as inept or cruel rulers, exalted the accomplishments of Charles Martel, and circulated stories of the family's great piety.
At the time of his death in 768, Pippin left his kingdom in the hands of his two sons, Charles (r.
When Carloman died of natural causes, Charles blocked the succession of Carloman's young son and installed himself as the king of the united Austrasia and Neustria.
Charles, more often known as Charles the Great or Charlemagne, embarked upon a programme of systematic expansion in 774 that unified a large portion of Europe, eventually controlling modern-day France, northern Italy, and Saxony.
In the wars that lasted beyond 800, he rewarded allies with war booty and command over parcels of land.
In 774, Charlemagne conquered the Lombards, which freed the papacy from the fear of Lombard conquest and marked the beginnings of the Papal States.
The coronation of Charlemagne as emperor on Christmas Day 800 is regarded as a turning point in medieval history, marking a return of the Western Roman Empire since the new emperor ruled over much of the area previously controlled by the Western emperors.
It also marks a change in Charlemagne's relationship with the Byzantine Empire, as the assumption of the imperial title by the Carolingians asserted their equivalence to the Byzantine state.
There were several differences between the newly established Carolingian Empire and both the older Western Roman Empire and the concurrent Byzantine Empire.
The Frankish lands were rural, with only a few small cities.
Most of the people were peasants who settled on small farms.
Little trade existed, and much of that was with the British Isles and Scandinavia, in contrast to the older Roman Empire with its trading networks centred on the Mediterranean.
The empire was administered by an itinerant court that travelled with the emperor, as well as approximately 300 imperial officials called counts, who administered the counties the empire had been divided into.
Clergy and local bishops served as officials, as well as the imperial officials, called missi dominici, who served as roving inspectors and troubleshooters.
Charlemagne's court in Aachen was the centre of the cultural revival, sometimes referred to as the "Carolingian Renaissance".
Literacy increased, as did development in the arts, architecture, jurisprudence, and liturgical and scriptural studies.
The English monk Alcuin (d.
Charlemagne's chancery—or writing office—made use of a new script today known as Carolingian minuscule, allowing a standard writing style that advanced communication across much of Europe.
Charlemagne sponsored changes in church liturgy, imposing the Roman form of church service on his domains, as well as the Gregorian chant in liturgical music for the churches.
An important activity for scholars during this period was copying, correcting, and disseminating basic works on religious and secular topics to encourage learning.
New works on religious topics and schoolbooks were also produced.
Grammarians of the period modified the Latin language, changing it from the Classical Latin of the Roman Empire into a more flexible form to fit the needs of the Church and government.
By the reign of Charlemagne, the language had so diverged from the classical Latin that it was later called Medieval Latin.
Charlemagne planned to continue the Frankish tradition of dividing his kingdom between all his heirs but was unable to do so as only one son, Louis the Pious (r.
Just before Charlemagne died in 814, he crowned Louis as his successor.
Numerous divisions of the empire marked Louis's reign of 26 years among his sons and, after 829, civil wars between various alliances of father and sons over the control of various parts of the empire.
Eventually, Louis recognised his eldest son Lothair I (d.
Louis divided the rest of the empire between Lothair and Charles the Bald (d.
Lothair took East Francia, comprising both banks of the Rhine and eastwards, leaving Charles West Francia with the empire to the west of the Rhineland and the Alps.
The division was disputed.
Pepin II of Aquitaine (d.
Louis the Pious died in 840, with the empire still in chaos.
A three-year civil war followed his death.
By the Treaty of Verdun (843), a kingdom between the Rhine and Rhone rivers was created for Lothair to go with his lands in Italy, and his imperial title was recognised.
Louis the German controlled Bavaria and the eastern lands in modern-day Germany.
Charles the Bald received the western Frankish lands, comprising most of modern-day France.
Charlemagne's grandsons and great-grandsons divided their kingdoms between their descendants, eventually causing all internal cohesion to be lost.
In 987, the Carolingian dynasty was replaced in the western lands, with the crowning of Hugh Capet (r.
In the eastern lands, the dynasty had died out earlier, in 911, with the death of Louis the Child, and the selection of the unrelated Conrad I (r.
Invasions, migrations, and raids by external foes accompanied the break-up of the Carolingian Empire.
The Atlantic and northern shores were harassed by the Vikings, who also raided the British Isles and settled there and in Iceland.
In 911, the Viking chieftain Rollo (d.
The eastern parts of the Frankish kingdoms, especially Germany and Italy, were under continual Magyar assault until the invader's defeat at the Battle of Lechfeld in 955.
The break-up of the Abbasid dynasty meant that the Islamic world fragmented into smaller political states, some of which began expanding into Italy and Sicily, as well as over the Pyrenees into the southern parts of the Frankish kingdoms.
Efforts by local kings to fight the invaders led to the formation of new political entities.
In Anglo-Saxon England, King Alfred the Great (r.
By the middle of the 10th century, Alfred's successors had conquered Northumbria and restored English control over most of the southern part of Great Britain.
In northern Britain, Kenneth MacAlpin (d.
In the early 10th century, the Ottonian dynasty had established itself in Germany, and was engaged in driving back the Magyars.
Its efforts culminated in the coronation in 962 of Otto I (r.
In 972, he secured recognition of his title by the Byzantine Empire, which he sealed with the marriage of his son Otto II (r.
By the late 10th century Italy had been drawn into the Ottonian sphere after a period of instability; Otto III (r.
The western Frankish kingdom was more fragmented, and although kings remained nominally in charge, much of the political power devolved to the local lords.
Missionary efforts to Scandinavia during the 9th and 10th centuries helped strengthen the growth of kingdoms such as Sweden, Denmark, and Norway, which gained power and territory.
Some kings converted to Christianity, although by the year 1000, not all had done so.
Scandinavians also expanded and colonised throughout Europe.
Besides the settlements in Ireland, England, and Normandy, further settlement took place in what became Russia and Iceland.
Swedish traders and raiders ranged down the rivers of the Russian steppe and even attempted to seize Constantinople in 860 and 907.
Christian Spain, initially driven into a small section of the peninsula in the north, expanded slowly south during the 9th and 10th centuries, establishing the kingdoms of Asturias and León.
In Eastern Europe, Byzantium revived its fortunes under Emperor Basil I (r.
Commerce revived, and the emperors oversaw the extension of a uniform administration to all the provinces.
The military was reorganised, which allowed the emperors John I (r.
The imperial court was the centre of a revival of classical learning, a process known as the Macedonian Renaissance.
Writers such as John Geometres (fl.
Missionary efforts by both Eastern and Western clergy resulted in the conversion of the Moravians, Bulgars, Bohemians, Poles, Magyars, and Slavic inhabitants of the Kievan Rus'.
These conversions contributed to the founding of political states in the lands of those peoples—the states of Moravia, Bulgaria, Bohemia, Poland, Hungary, and the Kievan Rus'.
Bulgaria, which was founded around 680, at its height reached from Budapest to the Black Sea and from the Dnieper River in modern Ukraine to the Adriatic Sea.
By 1018, the last Bulgarian nobles had surrendered to the Byzantine Empire.
Few large stone buildings were constructed between the Constantinian basilicas of the 4th and 8th centuries, although many smaller ones were built during the 6th and 7th centuries.
By the beginning of the 8th century, the Carolingian Empire revived the basilica form of architecture.
One feature of the basilica is the use of a transept, or the "arms" of a cross-shaped building that are perpendicular to the long nave.
Other new features of religious architecture include the crossing tower and a monumental entrance to the church, usually at the west end of the building.
Carolingian art was produced for a small group of figures around the court and the monasteries and churches they supported.
It was dominated by efforts to regain the dignity and classicism of imperial Roman and Byzantine art but was also influenced by the Insular art of the British Isles.
Insular art integrated the energy of Irish Celtic and Anglo-Saxon Germanic styles of ornament with Mediterranean forms such as the book, and established many characteristics of art for the rest of the medieval period.
Surviving religious works from the Early Middle Ages are mostly illuminated manuscripts and carved ivories, originally made for metalwork that has since been melted down.
Objects in precious metals were the most prestigious form of art, but almost all are lost except for a few crosses such as the Cross of Lothair, several reliquaries, and finds such as the Anglo-Saxon burial at Sutton Hoo and the hoards of Gourdon from Merovingian France, Guarrazar from Visigothic Spain and Nagyszentmiklós near Byzantine territory.
There are survivals from the large brooches in fibula or penannular form that were key pieces of personal adornment for elites, including the Irish Tara Brooch.
Highly decorated books were mostly Gospel Books and these have survived in larger numbers, including the Insular Book of Kells, the Book of Lindisfarne, and the imperial Codex Aureus of St.
Emmeram, which is one of the few to retain its "treasure binding" of gold encrusted with jewels.
Charlemagne's court seems to have been responsible for the acceptance of figurative monumental sculpture in Christian art, and by the end of the period near life-sized figures such as the Gero Cross were common in important churches.
During the later Roman Empire, the principal military developments were attempts to create an effective cavalry force and the continued development of highly specialised types of troops.
The creation of heavily armoured cataphract-type soldiers as cavalry was an important feature of the 5th-century Roman military.
The various invading tribes had differing emphases on types of soldiers—ranging from the primarily infantry centered Anglo-Saxons to the Vandals and Visigoths, who had a high proportion of cavalry in their armies.
During the early invasion period, the stirrup had not been introduced into warfare, which limited the usefulness of cavalry as shock troops because it was not possible to put the full force of the horse and rider behind blows struck by the rider.
The greatest change in military affairs during the invasion period was the adoption of the Hunnic composite bow in place of the earlier, and weaker, Scythian composite bow.
Another development was the increasing use of longswords and the progressive replacement of scale armour by mail armour and lamellar armour.
The importance of infantry and light cavalry declined during the early Carolingian period, with a growing dominance of elite heavy cavalry.
The use of militia-type levies of the free population declined over the Carolingian period.
Although much of the Carolingian armies were mounted, a large proportion during the early period appear to have been mounted infantry, rather than true cavalry.
One exception was Anglo-Saxon England, where the armies were still composed of regional levies, known as the fyrd, which were led by the local elites.
In military technology, one of the main changes was the return of the crossbow, which had been known in Roman times and reappeared as a military weapon during the last part of the Early Middle Ages.
Another change was the introduction of the stirrup, which increased the effectiveness of cavalry as shock troops.
A technological advance that had implications beyond the military was the horseshoe, which allowed horses to be used in rocky terrain.
The High Middle Ages was a period of tremendous population expansion.
The estimated population of Europe grew from 35 to 80 million between 1000 and 1347, although the exact causes remain unclear: improved agricultural techniques, the decline of slaveholding, a more clement climate and the lack of invasion have all been suggested.
As much as 90 per cent of the European population remained rural peasants.
Many were no longer settled in isolated farms but had gathered into small communities, usually known as manors or villages.
These peasants were often subject to noble overlords and owed them rents and other services in a system known as manorialism.
There remained a few free peasants throughout this period and beyond, with more of them in the regions of Southern Europe than in the north.
The practice of assarting, or bringing new lands into production by offering incentives to the peasants who settled them, also contributed to population expansion.
The open-field system of agriculture was commonly practised in most of Europe, especially in "northwestern and central Europe".
Such agricultural communities had three essential characteristics: individual peasant holdings in the form of strips of land were scattered among the different fields belonging to the manor; crops were rotated from year to year to preserve soil fertility; and common land was used for grazing livestock and other purposes.
Some regions used a three-field system of crop rotation; others retained the older two-field system.
Other sections of society included the nobility, clergy, and townspeople.
Nobles, both the titled nobility and simple knights, exploited the manors and the peasants.
However, they did not own lands outright but were granted rights to the income from a manor or other lands by an overlord through the system of feudalism.
During the 11th and 12th centuries, these lands, or fiefs, came to be considered hereditary.
In most areas, they were no longer divisible between all the heirs, as had been the case in the early medieval period.
Instead, most fiefs and lands went to the eldest son.
The dominance of the nobility was built upon its control of the land, its military service as heavy cavalry, control of castles, and various immunities from taxes or other impositions.
Castles, initially in wood but later in stone, began to be constructed in the 9th and 10th centuries in response to the disorder of the time, and protected from invaders and allowing lords defence from rivals.
Control of castles allowed the nobles to defy kings or other overlords.
Nobles were stratified; kings and the highest-ranking nobility controlled large numbers of commoners and large tracts of land, as well as other nobles.
Beneath them, lesser nobles had authority over smaller land areas and fewer people.
Knights were the lowest level of nobility; they controlled but did not own land and had to serve other nobles.
The clergy was divided into two types: the secular clergy, who lived out in the world, and the regular clergy, who lived isolated under a religious rule and usually consisted of monks.
Throughout the period, monks remained a tiny proportion of the population, usually less than one percent.
Most of the regular clergy were drawn from the nobility, the same social class that served as the recruiting ground for the upper levels of the secular clergy.
The local parish priests were often drawn from the peasant class.
Townspeople were somewhat unusual, as they did not fit into the traditional three-fold division of society into nobles, clergy, and peasants.
During the 12th and 13th centuries, the ranks of the townspeople expanded greatly as existing towns grew and new population centres were founded.
But throughout the Middle Ages, the population of the towns probably never exceeded 10 percent of the total population.
Jews also spread across Europe during the period.
Communities were established in Germany and England in the 11th and 12th centuries, but Spanish Jews, long settled in Spain under the Muslims, came under Christian rule and increasing pressure to convert to Christianity.
Most Jews were confined to the cities, as they were not allowed to own land or be peasants.
Besides the Jews, there were other non-Christians on the edges of Europe—pagan Slavs in Eastern Europe and Muslims in Southern Europe.
Women in the Middle Ages were officially required to be subordinate to some male, whether their father, husband, or other kinsman.
Widows were often allowed much control over their lives, but they were still restricted legally.
Women's work generally consisted of household or other domestically inclined tasks.
Peasant women were usually responsible for caring for the household, child care, gardening, and animal husbandry near the house.
They could supplement their household income by spinning or brewing at home.
At harvest time, they were also expected to help with fieldwork.
Townswomen, like peasant women, were responsible for the household and could also engage in trade.
The trades that were open to women varied by country and period.
Noblewomen were responsible for running a household and could occasionally be expected to handle estates in the absence of male relatives, but they were usually restricted from participation in military or government affairs.
The only role open to women in the Church was that of nuns, as they could not become priests.
In central and northern Italy and in Flanders, the rise of towns that were, to a degree, self-governing stimulated economic growth and created an environment for new types of trade associations.
Commercial cities on the shores of the Baltic entered into agreements known as the Hanseatic League.
The Italian Maritime republics such as Venice, Genoa, and Pisa expanded their trade throughout the Mediterranean.
Great trading fairs were established and flourished in northern France during the period, allowing Italian and German merchants to trade with each other as well as local merchants.
In the late 13th century new land and sea routes to the Far East were pioneered, famously described in The Travels of Marco Polo written by one of the traders, Marco Polo (d.
Besides new trading opportunities, agricultural and technological improvements increased crop yields, which allowed the trade networks to expand.
Rising trade brought new methods of dealing with money, and gold coinage was again minted in Europe, first in Italy and later in France and other countries.
New forms of commercial contracts emerged, sharing risk among merchants.
Accounting methods improved, partly through the use of double-entry bookkeeping; letters of credit also appeared, allowing easy transmission of money.
The High Middle Ages was the formative period in the history of the modern Western state.
Kings in France, England, and Spain consolidated their power and established lasting governing institutions.
New kingdoms such as Hungary and Poland, after their conversion to Christianity, became Central European powers.
The Magyars settled Hungary around 900 under King Árpád (d.
The papacy, long attached to an ideology of independence from secular kings, first asserted its claim to temporal authority over the entire Christian world; the Papal Monarchy reached its apogee in the early 13th century under the pontificate of Innocent III (pope 1198–1216).
Northern Crusades and the advance of Christian kingdoms and military orders into previously pagan regions in the Baltic and Finnic north-east brought the forced assimilation of numerous native peoples into European culture.
During the early High Middle Ages, Germany was ruled by the Ottonian dynasty, which struggled to control the powerful dukes ruling over territorial duchies, tracing back to the Migration period.
In 1024, they were replaced by the Salian dynasty, who famously clashed with the papacy under Emperor Henry IV (r.
His successors continued to struggle against the papacy as well as the German nobility.
A period of instability followed the death of Emperor Henry V (r.
Although he ruled effectively, the basic problems remained, and his successors struggled into the 13th century.
Barbarossa's grandson Frederick II (r.
His court was famous for its scholars, and he was often accused of heresy.
He and his successors faced many difficulties, including the invasion of the Mongols into Europe in the mid-13th century.
Mongols first shattered the principalities of Kievan Rus' and then invaded Eastern Europe in 1241, 1259, and 1287.
Under the Capetian dynasty the French monarchy slowly began to expand its authority over the nobility, growing out of the Île-de-France to exert control over more of the country in the 11th and 12th centuries.
They faced a powerful rival in the Dukes of Normandy, who in 1066 under William the Conqueror (duke 1035–1087), conquered England (r.
Normans also settled in Sicily and southern Italy, when Robert Guiscard (d.
Under the Angevin dynasty of Henry II (r.
Richard's younger brother John (r.
This led to dissension among the English nobility.
John's financial exactions to pay for his unsuccessful attempts to regain Normandy led in 1215 to Magna Carta, a charter that confirmed the rights and privileges of free men in England.
The French monarchy continued to make gains against the nobility during the late 12th and 13th centuries, bringing more territories within the kingdom under the king's personal rule and centralising the royal administration.
In Iberia, the Christian states, which had been confined to the north-western part of the peninsula, began to push back against the Islamic states in the south, a period known as the Reconquista.
By about 1150, the Christian north had coalesced into the five major kingdoms of León, Castile, Aragon, Navarre, and Portugal.
Southern Iberia remained under control of Islamic states, initially under the Caliphate of Córdoba, which broke up in 1031 into a shifting number of petty states known as taifas, who fought with the Christians until the Almohad Caliphate re-established centralised rule over Southern Iberia in the 1170s.
Christian forces advanced again in the early 13th century, culminating in the capture of Seville in 1248.
In the 11th century, the Seljuk Turks took over much of the Middle East, occupying Persia during the 1040s, Armenia in the 1060s, and Jerusalem in 1070.
In 1071, the Turkish army defeated the Byzantine army at the Battle of Manzikert and captured the Byzantine Emperor Romanus IV (r.
The Turks were then free to invade Asia Minor, which dealt a dangerous blow to the Byzantine Empire by seizing a large part of its population and its economic heartland.
Although the Byzantines regrouped and recovered somewhat, they never fully regained Asia Minor and were often on the defensive.
The Turks also had difficulties, losing control of Jerusalem to the Fatimids of Egypt and suffering from a series of internal civil wars.
The Byzantines also faced a revived Bulgaria, which in the late 12th and 13th centuries spread throughout the Balkans.
The Crusades were intended to seize Jerusalem from Muslim control.
The First Crusade was proclaimed by Pope Urban II (pope 1088–1099) at the Council of Clermont in 1095 in response to a request from the Byzantine Emperor Alexios I Komnenos (r.
Urban promised indulgence to anyone who took part.
Tens of thousands of people from all levels of society mobilised across Europe and captured Jerusalem in 1099.
One feature of the crusades was the pogroms against local Jews that often took place as the crusaders left their countries for the East.
These were especially brutal during the First Crusade, when the Jewish communities in Cologne, Mainz, and Worms were destroyed, as well as other communities in cities between the rivers Seine and the Rhine.
Another outgrowth of the crusades was the foundation of a new type of monastic order, the military orders of the Templars and Hospitallers, which fused monastic life with military service.
The Crusaders consolidated their conquests into Crusader states.
During the 12th and 13th centuries, there were a series of conflicts between them and the surrounding Islamic states.
Appeals from the crusader states to the papacy led to further crusades, such as the Third Crusade, called to try to regain Jerusalem, which had been captured by Saladin (d.
In 1203, the Fourth Crusade was diverted from the Holy Land to Constantinople, and captured the city in 1204, setting up a Latin Empire of Constantinople and greatly weakening the Byzantine Empire.
The Byzantines recaptured the city in 1261 but never regained their former strength.
By 1291, all the crusader states had been captured or forced from the mainland.
However, a titular Kingdom of Jerusalem survived on the island of Cyprus for several years afterwards.
Popes called for crusades elsewhere besides the Holy Land: in Spain, southern France, and along the Baltic.
The Spanish crusades became fused with the Reconquista of Spain from the Muslims.
Although the Templars and Hospitallers took part in the Spanish crusades, similar Spanish military religious orders were founded, most of which had become part of the two main orders of Calatrava and Santiago by the beginning of the 12th century.
Northern Europe also remained outside Christian influence until the 11th century or later and became a crusading venue as part of the Northern Crusades of the 12th to 14th centuries.
These crusades also spawned a military order, the Order of the Sword Brothers.
Another order, the Teutonic Knights, although founded in the crusader states, focused much of its activity in the Baltic after 1225 and, in 1309, moved its headquarters to Marienburg in Prussia.
During the 11th century, developments in philosophy and theology led to increased intellectual activity.
There was a debate between the realists and the nominalists over the concept of "universals".
Philosophical discourse was stimulated by the rediscovery of Aristotle and his emphasis on empiricism and rationalism.
Scholars such as Peter Abelard (d.
In the late 11th and early 12th centuries cathedral schools spread throughout Western Europe, signalling the shift of learning from monasteries to cathedrals and towns.
The oldest university currently in continuous operation in the world appeared in the 11th century in Italy (the University of Bologna) and two more were established in the 12th century in France (the University of Paris) and England (the University of Oxford).
Philosophy and theology fused in scholasticism, an attempt by 12th- and 13th-century scholars to reconcile authoritative texts, most notably Aristotle and the Bible.
This movement tried to employ a systemic approach to truth and reason and culminated in the thought of Thomas Aquinas (d.
Chivalry and the ethos of courtly love developed in royal and noble courts.
This culture was expressed in the vernacular languages rather than Latin and comprised poems, stories, legends, and popular songs spread by troubadours or Minnesängers, or wandering minstrels.
Often the stories were written down in the chansons de geste, or "songs of great deeds", such as The Song of Roland or The Song of Hildebrand.
Secular and religious histories were also produced.
Geoffrey of Monmouth (d.
Other works were more clearly history, such as Otto von Freising's (d.
Legal studies advanced during the 12th century.
Both secular law and canon law, or ecclesiastical law, were studied in the High Middle Ages.
Secular law, or Roman law, was significantly advanced by the discovery of the Corpus Juris Civilis in the 11th century, and by 1100, Roman law was being taught at Bologna.
This led to the recording and standardisation of legal codes throughout Western Europe.
Canon law was also studied, and around 1140, a monk named Gratian (fl.
Among the results of the Greek and Islamic influence on this period in European history was the replacement of Roman numerals with the decimal positional number system and the invention of algebra, which allowed more advanced mathematics.
Astronomy advanced following the translation of Ptolemy's Almagest from Greek into Latin in the late 12th century.
Medicine was also studied, especially in southern Italy, where Islamic medicine influenced the school at Salerno.
In the 12th and 13th centuries, Europe experienced economic growth and innovations in methods of production.
Significant technological advances included the invention of the windmill, the first mechanical clocks, the manufacture of distilled spirits, and the use of the astrolabe.
Concave spectacles were invented around 1286 by an unknown Italian artisan, probably working in or near Pisa.
The development of a three-field rotation system for planting crops increased the usage of land from one-half in use each year under the old two-field system to two-thirds under the new system, with a consequent increase in production.
The development of the heavy plough allowed heavier soils to be farmed more efficiently, aided by the spread of the horse collar, which led to the use of draught horses in place of oxen.
Horses are faster than oxen and require less pasture, factors that aided the implementation of the three-field system.
Legumes – such as peas, beans, or lentils – were grown more widely as crops, in addition to the usual cereal crops of wheat, oats, barley, and rye.
The construction of cathedrals and castles advanced building technology, developing large stone buildings.
Ancillary structures included new town halls, houses, bridges, and tithe barns.
Shipbuilding improved with the use of the rib and plank method rather than the old Roman system of mortise and tenon.
Other improvements to ships included the use of lateen sails and the stern-post rudder, both of which increased the speed at which ships could be sailed.
In military affairs, the use of infantry with specialised roles increased.
Along with the still-dominant heavy cavalry, armies often included mounted and infantry crossbowmen, as well as sappers and engineers.
Crossbows, which had been known in Late Antiquity, increased in use partly because of the increase in siege warfare in the 10th and 11th centuries.
The increasing use of crossbows during the 12th and 13th centuries led to the use of closed-face helmets, heavy body armour, as well as horse armour.
Gunpowder was known in Europe by the mid-13th century with a recorded use in European warfare by the English against the Scots in 1304.
However, it was merely used as an explosive and not as a weapon.
Cannon were being used for sieges in the 1320s, and hand-held guns were in use by the 1360s.
In the 10th century, the establishment of churches and monasteries led to the development of stone architecture that elaborated vernacular Roman forms, from which the term "Romanesque" was derived.
Where available, Roman brick and stone buildings were recycled for their materials.
From the tentative beginnings known as the First Romanesque, the style flourished and spread across Europe in a remarkably homogeneous form.
Just before 1000, a great wave of stone churches were being built all over Europe.
Romanesque buildings have massive stone walls, openings topped by semi-circular arches, small windows, and, particularly in France, arched stone vaults.
The large portal with coloured sculpture in high relief became a central feature of façades, especially in France, and the capitals of columns were often carved with narrative scenes of imaginative monsters and animals.
According to art historian C.
Dodwell, "virtually all the churches in the West were decorated with wall-paintings", of which few survive.
Simultaneous with the development in church architecture, the distinctive European form of the castle was developed and became crucial to politics and warfare.
Romanesque art, especially metalwork, was at its most sophisticated in Mosan art, in which distinct artistic personalities, including Nicholas of Verdun (d.
An almost classical style is seen in works such as a font at Liège, contrasting with the writhing animals of the exactly contemporary Gloucester Candlestick.
Large illuminated bibles and psalters were the typical forms of luxury manuscripts, and wall-painting flourished in churches, often following a scheme with a Last Judgement on the west wall, a Christ in Majesty at the east end, and narrative biblical scenes down the nave, or in the best surviving example, at Saint-Savin-sur-Gartempe, on the barrel-vaulted roof.
From the early 12th century, French builders developed the Gothic style, marked by the use of rib vaults, pointed arches, flying buttresses, and large stained glass windows.
It was used mainly in churches and cathedrals and continued until the 16th century in much of Europe.
Classic examples of Gothic architecture include Chartres Cathedral and Reims Cathedral in France, as well as Salisbury Cathedral in England.
Stained glass became a crucial element in the design of churches, which continued to use extensive wall-paintings, now almost all lost.
During this period, the practice of manuscript illumination gradually passed from monasteries to lay workshops, so that according to Janetta Benton "by 1300 most monks bought their books in shops", and the book of hours developed as a form of devotional book for lay-people.
Metalwork remained the most prestigious art form, with Limoges enamel a popular and relatively affordable option for objects such as reliquaries and crosses.
In Italy the innovations of Cimabue and Duccio, followed by the Trecento master Giotto (d.
Increasing prosperity during the 12th century resulted in greater production of secular art; many carved ivory objects such as gaming-pieces, combs, and small religious figures have survived.
Monastic reform became an important issue during the 11th century, as elites began to worry that monks were not adhering to the rules binding them to a strictly religious life.
Cluny Abbey, founded in the Mâcon region of France in 909, was established as part of the Cluniac Reforms, a larger movement of monastic reform in response to this fear.
Cluny quickly established a reputation for austerity and rigour.
It sought to maintain a high quality of spiritual life by placing itself under the protection of the papacy and by electing its own abbot without interference from laymen, thus maintaining economic and political independence from local lords.
Monastic reform inspired change in the secular Church.
The ideals upon which it was based were brought to the papacy by Pope Leo IX (pope 1049–1054) and provided the ideology of clerical independence that led to the Investiture Controversy in the late 11th century.
This involved Pope Gregory VII (pope 1073–1085) and Emperor Henry IV, who initially clashed over episcopal appointments, a dispute that turned into a battle over the ideas of investiture, clerical marriage, and simony.
The emperor saw the protection of the Church as one of his responsibilities and wanted to preserve the right to appoint his own choices as bishops within his lands.
Still, the papacy insisted on the Church's independence from secular lords.
These issues remained unresolved after the compromise of 1122, known as the Concordat of Worms.
The dispute represents a significant stage in creating a papal monarchy separate from and equal to lay authorities.
It also had the permanent consequence of empowering German princes at the expense of the German emperors.
The High Middle Ages was a period of great religious movements.
Besides the Crusades and monastic reforms, people sought to participate in new forms of religious life.
New monastic orders were founded, including the Carthusians and the Cistercians.
The latter, in particular, expanded rapidly in their early years under the guidance of Bernard of Clairvaux (d.
These new orders were formed in response to the feeling of the laity that Benedictine monasticism no longer met the needs of the laymen, who, along with those wishing to enter the religious life, wanted a return to the simpler hermetical monasticism of early Christianity, or to live an Apostolic life.
Religious pilgrimages were also encouraged.
Old pilgrimage sites such as Rome, Jerusalem, and Compostela received increasing numbers of visitors, and new sites such as Monte Gargano and Bari rose to prominence.
In the 13th century mendicant orders—the Franciscans and the Dominicans—who swore vows of poverty and earned their living by begging, were approved by the papacy.
Religious groups such as the Waldensians and the Humiliati also attempted to return to the life of early Christianity in the middle 12th and early 13th centuries, another heretical movement condemned by the papacy.
Others joined the Cathars, another movement condemned as heretical by the papacy.
In 1209, a crusade was preached against the Cathars, the Albigensian Crusade, which, in combination with the medieval Inquisition, eliminated them.
The first years of the 14th century were marked by famines, culminating in the Great Famine of 1315–1317.
The causes of the Great Famine included the slow transition from the Medieval Warm Period to the Little Ice Age, which left the population vulnerable when bad weather caused crop failures.
The years 1313–1314 and 1317–1321 were excessively rainy throughout Europe, resulting in widespread crop failures.
The climate change—which resulted in a declining average annual temperature for Europe during the 14th century—was accompanied by an economic downturn.
These troubles were followed in 1347 by the Black Death, a pandemic that spread throughout Europe during the following three years.
The death toll was probably about 35 million people in Europe, about one-third of the population.
Towns were especially hard-hit because of their crowded conditions.
Large areas of land were left sparsely inhabited, and in some places fields were left unworked.
Wages rose as landlords sought to entice fewer available workers to their fields.
Further problems were lower rents and lower demand for food, which cut into agricultural income.
Urban workers also felt they had a right to greater earnings, and popular uprisings broke out across Europe.
Among the uprisings were the jacquerie in France, the Peasants' Revolt in England, and revolts in the cities of Florence in Italy and Ghent and Bruges in Flanders.
The trauma of the plague led to an increased piety throughout Europe, manifested by the foundation of new charities, the self-mortification of the flagellants, and the scapegoating of Jews.
Conditions were further unsettled by the return of the plague throughout the rest of the 14th century; it continued to strike Europe periodically during the rest of the Middle Ages.
Society throughout Europe was disturbed by the dislocations caused by the Black Death.
Lands that had been marginally productive were abandoned as the survivors could acquire more fertile areas.
Although serfdom declined in Western Europe, it became more common in Eastern Europe, as landlords imposed it on those of their tenants who had previously been free.
Most peasants in Western Europe changed the work they had previously owed to their landlords into cash rents.
The percentage of serfs among the peasantry declined from a high of 90 to closer to 50 percent by the end of the period.
Landlords also became more conscious of common interests with other landholders and joined to extort their governments' privileges.
Partly at the urging of landlords, governments attempted to legislate a return to the economic conditions that existed before the Black Death.
Non-clergy became increasingly literate, and urban populations began to imitate the nobility's interest in chivalry.
Jewish communities were expelled from England in 1290 and from France in 1306.
Although some were allowed back into France, most were not.
Many Jews emigrated eastwards, settling in Poland and Hungary.
The Jews were expelled from Spain in 1492, and dispersed to Turkey, France, Italy, and Holland.
The rise of banking in Italy during the 13th century continued throughout the 14th century, fuelled partly by the increasing warfare of the period and the needs of the papacy to move money between kingdoms.
Many banking firms loaned money to royalty at great risk, as some were bankrupted when kings defaulted on their loans.
Strong, royalty-based nation states rose throughout Europe in the Late Middle Ages, particularly in England, France, and the Christian kingdoms of the Iberian Peninsula: Aragon, Castile, and Portugal.
The long conflicts of the period strengthened royal control over their kingdoms and were extremely hard on the peasantry.
Kings profited from warfare that extended royal legislation and increased the lands they directly controlled.
Paying for the wars required that methods of taxation become more effective and efficient, and the rate of taxation often increased.
The requirement to obtain the consent of taxpayers allowed representative bodies such as the English Parliament and the French Estates General to gain power and authority.
Throughout the 14th century, French kings sought to expand their influence at the expense of the territorial holdings of the nobility.
They ran into difficulties when attempting to confiscate the holdings of the English kings in southern France, leading to the Hundred Years' War, waged from 1337 to 1453.
Early in the war the English under Edward III (r.
The resulting stresses almost caused the disintegration of the French kingdom during the early years of the war.
In the early 15th century, France again came close to dissolving, but in the late 1420s, the military successes of Joan of Arc (d.
The price was high, as the population of France at the end of the Wars was likely half what it had been at the start of the conflict.
Conversely, the Wars positively affected English national identity, doing much to fuse the various local identities into a national English ideal.
The conflict with France also helped create a national culture in England separate from French culture, which had previously been the dominant influence.
The dominance of the English longbow began during early stages of the Hundred Years' War, and cannon appeared on the battlefield at Crécy in 1346.
In modern-day Germany, the Holy Roman Empire continued to rule, but the elective nature of the imperial crown meant there was no enduring dynasty around which a strong state could form.
Further east, the kingdoms of Poland, Hungary, and Bohemia grew powerful.
In Iberia, the Christian kingdoms continued to gain land from the Muslim kingdoms of the peninsula; Portugal concentrated on expanding overseas during the 15th century, while the other kingdoms were riven by difficulties over royal succession and other concerns.
After losing the Hundred Years' War, England went on to suffer a long civil war known as the Wars of the Roses, which lasted into the 1490s and only ended when Henry Tudor (r.
In Scandinavia, Margaret I of Denmark (r.
The major power around the Baltic Sea was the Hanseatic League, a commercial confederation of city-states that traded from Western Europe to Russia.
Scotland emerged from English domination under Robert the Bruce (r.
Although the Palaeologi emperors recaptured Constantinople from the Western Europeans in 1261, they could never regain control of much of the former imperial lands.
They usually controlled only a small section of the Balkan Peninsula near Constantinople, the city itself, and some coastal lands on the Black Sea and around the Aegean Sea.
The former Byzantine lands in the Balkans were divided between the new Kingdom of Serbia, the Second Bulgarian Empire, and the city-state of Venice.
A new Turkish tribe threatened the power of the Byzantine emperors, the Ottomans, who established themselves in Anatolia in the 13th century and steadily expanded throughout the 14th century.
The Ottomans expanded into Europe, reducing Bulgaria to a vassal state by 1366 and taking over Serbia after its defeat at the Battle of Kosovo in 1389.
Western Europeans rallied to the plight of the Christians in the Balkans and declared a new crusade in 1396; a great army was sent to the Balkans, where it was defeated at the Battle of Nicopolis.
Constantinople was finally captured by the Ottomans in 1453.
During the tumultuous 14th century, disputes within the leadership of the Church led to the Avignon Papacy of 1309–1376, also called the "Babylonian Captivity of the Papacy" (a reference to the Babylonian captivity of the Jews), and then to the Great Schism, lasting from 1378 to 1418, when there were two and later three rival popes, each supported by several states.
Ecclesiastical officials convened at the Council of Constance in 1414, and in the following year the council deposed one of the rival popes leaving only two claimants.
Further depositions followed, and in November 1417, the council elected Martin V (pope 1417–1431) as pope.
Besides the schism, the Western Church was riven by theological controversies, some of which became heresies.
Wycliffe's teachings influenced two of the major heretical movements of the later Middle Ages: Lollardy in England and Hussitism in Bohemia.
The Bohemian movement initiated with the teaching of Jan Hus, who was burned at the stake in 1415 after being condemned as a heretic by the Council of Constance.
The Hussite Church, although the target of a crusade, survived beyond the Middle Ages.
Other heresies were manufactured, such as the accusations against the Knights Templar that resulted in their suppression in 1312, and the division of their great wealth between the French King Philip IV (r.
The papacy further refined the practice in the Mass in the Late Middle Ages, holding that the clergy alone was allowed to partake of the wine in the Eucharist.
This further distanced the secular laity from the clergy.
The laity continued the practices of pilgrimages, veneration of relics, and belief in the power of the Devil.
Mystics such as Meister Eckhart (d.
Besides mysticism, belief in witches and witchcraft became widespread.
By the late 15th century, the Church had begun to lend credence to populist fears of witchcraft with its condemnation of witches in 1484 and the publication in 1486 of the Malleus Maleficarum, the most popular handbook for witch-hunters.
During the Later Middle Ages, theologians such as John Duns Scotus (d.
Their efforts undermined the prevailing Platonic idea of universals.
Ockham's insistence that reason operates independently of faith allowed science to be separated from theology and philosophy.
Legal studies were marked by the steady advance of Roman law into areas of jurisprudence previously governed by customary law.
England was the lone exception to this trend, where the common law remained pre-eminent.
Other countries codified their laws; legal codes were promulgated in Castile, Poland, and Lithuania.
Education remained mostly focused on the training of future clergy.
The basic learning of the letters and numbers remained the province of the family or a village priest, but the secondary subjects of the trivium—grammar, rhetoric, logic—were studied in cathedral schools or schools provided by cities.
Commercial secondary schools spread, and some Italian towns had more than one such enterprise.
Universities also spread throughout Europe in the 14th and 15th centuries.
Lay literacy rates rose but were still low; one estimate gave a literacy rate of 10 percent of males and 1 percent of females in 1500.
The publication of vernacular literature increased, with Dante (d.
Much literature remained religious, and although a great deal of it continued to be written in Latin, a new demand developed for saints' lives and other devotional tracts in the vernacular languages.
This was fed by the growth of the Devotio Moderna movement, most prominently in the formation of the Brethren of the Common Life, but also in the works of German mystics such as Meister Eckhart and Johannes Tauler (d.
Theatre also developed in the guise of miracle plays put on by the Church.
At the end of the period, the development of the printing press by Johannes Gutenberg in about 1450 led to the establishment of publishing houses throughout Europe by 1500.
In the early 15th century, the countries of the Iberian Peninsula began to sponsor exploration beyond the boundaries of Europe.
Prince Henry the Navigator of Portugal (d.
After his death, exploration continued; Bartolomeu Dias (d.
The combined Spanish monarchies of Castile and Aragon sponsored the voyage of exploration by Christopher Columbus (d.
The English crown under Henry VII sponsored the voyage of John Cabot (d.
One of the major developments in the military sphere during the Late Middle Ages was the increased use of infantry and light cavalry.
The English also employed longbowmen, but other countries were unable to create similar forces with the same success.
Armour continued to advance, spurred by the increasing power of crossbows, and plate armour was developed to protect soldiers from crossbows as well as the hand-held guns that were developed.
Pole arms reached new prominence with the development of the Flemish and Swiss infantry armed with pikes and other long spears.
In agriculture, the increased usage of sheep with long-fibred wool allowed a stronger thread to be spun.
In addition, the spinning wheel replaced the traditional distaff for spinning wool, tripling production.
A less technological refinement that still greatly affected daily life was the use of buttons as closures for garments, which allowed for better fitting without having to lace clothing on the wearer.
Windmills were refined with the creation of the tower mill, allowing the upper part of the windmill to be spun around to face the direction from which the wind was blowing.
The blast furnace appeared around 1350 in Sweden, increasing the quantity of iron produced and improving its quality.
The first patent law in 1447 in Venice protected the rights of inventors to their inventions.
The Late Middle Ages in Europe correspond to Italy's Trecento and Early Renaissance cultural periods.
Northern Europe and Spain continued to use Gothic styles, which became increasingly elaborate in the 15th century until almost the end.
International Gothic was a courtly style that reached much of Europe in the decades around 1400, producing masterpieces such as the Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry.
All over Europe secular art continued to increase in quantity and quality.
In the 15th century, the mercantile classes of Italy and Flanders became important patrons, commissioning small portraits of themselves in oils as well as a growing range of luxury items such as jewellery, ivory caskets, cassone chests, and maiolica pottery.
These objects also included the Hispano-Moresque ware produced by mostly Mudéjar potters in Spain.
Although royalty owned huge plate collections, little survives except for the Royal Gold Cup.
Italian silk manufacture developed so that Western churches and elites no longer needed to rely on imports from Byzantium or the Islamic world.
In France and Flanders, tapestry weaving of sets like The Lady and the Unicorn became a major luxury industry.
The large external sculptural schemes of Early Gothic churches gave way to more sculpture inside the building, as tombs became more elaborate and other features such as pulpits were sometimes lavishly carved, as in the Pulpit by Giovanni Pisano in Sant'Andrea.
Painted or carved wooden relief altarpieces became common, especially as churches created many side-chapels.
Early Netherlandish painting by artists such as Jan van Eyck (d.
From about 1450, printed books rapidly became popular, though still expensive.
There were around 30,000 different editions of incunabula, or works printed before 1500, by which time illuminated manuscripts were commissioned only by royalty and a few others.
Very small woodcuts, nearly all religious, were affordable even by peasants in parts of Northern Europe from the middle of the 15th century.
More expensive engravings supplied a wealthier market with various images.
The medieval period is frequently caricatured as a "time of ignorance and superstition" that placed "the word of religious authorities over personal experience and rational activity.
Renaissance scholars saw the Middle Ages as a period of decline from the high culture and civilisation of the Classical world.
Enlightenment scholars saw reason as superior to faith and thus viewed the Middle Ages as a time of ignorance and superstition.
Others argue that reason was held in high regard during the Middle Ages.
Science historian Edward Grant writes, "If revolutionary rational thoughts were expressed [in the 18th century], they were only made possible because of the long medieval tradition that established the use of reason as one of the most important of human activities".
Also, contrary to common belief, David Lindberg writes, "the late medieval scholar rarely experienced the coercive power of the Church and would have regarded himself as free (particularly in the natural sciences) to follow reason and observation wherever they led".
The caricature of the period is also reflected in some more specific notions.
One misconception, first propagated in the 19th century and still very common, is that all people in the Middle Ages believed that the Earth was flat.
This is untrue, as lecturers in medieval universities commonly argued that evidence showed the Earth was a sphere.
Lindberg and Ronald Numbers, another scholar of the period, state that there "was scarcely a Christian scholar of the Middle Ages who did not acknowledge [Earth's] sphericity and even know its approximate circumference".
Other misconceptions such as "the Church prohibited autopsies and dissections during the Middle Ages", "the rise of Christianity killed off ancient science", or "the medieval Christian Church suppressed the growth of natural philosophy", are all cited by Numbers as examples of widely popular myths that still pass as historical truth, although they are not supported by historical research.
Medieval Realms - Learning resources from the British Library, including studies of beautiful medieval manuscripts.
The Renaissance (UK: rin-AY-sənss, US: REN-ə-sahnss) was a European period of history and cultural movement taking place at the end of the Late Middle Ages and the beginning of the early modern era.
It is variously defined as lasting from the 14th century to the 17th or, more narrowly, as covering only the 15th and 16th centuries.
It was characterized by the European rediscovery and revival of the literary, philosophical, and artistic achievements of classical antiquity.
Associated with great change in art, architecture, politics, literature, exploration and technology, the Renaissance was first centered in the Republic of Florence, then spread to the rest of Italy and later throughout Europe.
The Renaissance's intellectual basis was founded in its version of humanism, derived from the concept of Roman humanitas and the rediscovery of classical Greek philosophy, such as that of Protagoras, who said that "man is the measure of all things".
Although the invention of metal movable type sped the dissemination of ideas from the later 15th century, the changes of the Renaissance were not uniform across Europe: the first traces appear in Italy as early as the late 13th century, in particular with the writings of Dante and the paintings of Giotto.
As a cultural movement, the Renaissance encompassed innovative flowering of literary Latin and an explosion of vernacular literatures, beginning with the 14th-century resurgence of learning based on classical sources, which contemporaries credited to Petrarch; the development of linear perspective and other techniques of rendering a more natural reality in painting; and gradual but widespread educational reform.
It saw myriad artistic developments and contributions from such polymaths as Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo, who inspired the term "Renaissance man".
In politics, the Renaissance contributed to the development of the customs and conventions of diplomacy.
The period also saw revolutions in printing and navigation, as well as the introduction of modern banking and the field of accounting.
The Renaissance began in Italy during the crisis of the Late Middle Ages.
It had a different period and characteristics north of the Alps and in Spain.
In Italy, the period conventionally ends with the waning of humanism, and the advent of the Reformation (1517), the Sack of Rome (1527) or the Counter-Reformation (1545), and in art, the Baroque period.
Proponents of a "long Renaissance," however, may propose that (outside of Italy) the period extended into the 17th century.
The traditional view focuses more on the Renaissance's early modern aspects and argues that it was a break from the past, but many historians today focus more on its medieval aspects and argue that it was an extension of the Middle Ages.
The beginnings of the period—the early Renaissance of the 15th century and the Italian Proto-Renaissance from around 1250 or 1300—overlap considerably with the Late Middle Ages, conventionally dated to c.
The Renaissance began in Florence, one of the many states of Italy.
The Italian Renaissance concluded in 1527 when Holy Roman Emperor Charles V launched an assault on Rome during the war of the League of Cognac.
Nevertheless, its impact endured in the art of renowned Italian painters like Tintoretto, Sofonisba Anguissola, and Paolo Veronese, who continued their work during the mid-to-late 16th century.
Various theories have been proposed to account for its origins and characteristics, focusing on a variety of factors, including Florence's social and civic peculiarities at the time: its political structure, the patronage of its dominant family, the Medici, and the migration of Greek scholars and their texts to Italy following the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Empire.
Other major centers were Venice, Genoa, Milan, Rome during the Renaissance Papacy, and Naples.
From Italy, the Renaissance spread throughout Europe and also to American, African and Asian territories ruled by the European colonial powers of the time or where Christian missionaries were active.
The Renaissance has a long and complex historiography, and in line with general skepticism of discrete periodizations, there has been much debate among historians reacting to the 19th-century glorification of the "Renaissance" and individual cultural heroes as "Renaissance men", questioning the usefulness of Renaissance as a term and as a historical delineation.
Some observers have questioned whether the Renaissance was a cultural "advance" from the Middle Ages, instead seeing it as a period of pessimism and nostalgia for classical antiquity, while social and economic historians, especially of the longue durée, have instead focused on the continuity between the two eras, which are linked, as Panofsky observed, "by a thousand ties".
The Renaissance was a cultural movement that profoundly affected European intellectual life in the early modern period.
Beginning in Italy, and spreading to the rest of Europe by the 16th century, its influence was felt in art, architecture, philosophy, literature, music, science, technology, politics, religion, and other aspects of intellectual inquiry.
Renaissance scholars employed the humanist method in study, and searched for realism and human emotion in art.
Renaissance humanists such as Poggio Bracciolini sought out in Europe's monastic libraries the Latin literary, historical, and oratorical texts of antiquity, while the fall of Constantinople (1453) generated a wave of émigré Greek scholars bringing precious manuscripts in ancient Greek, many of which had fallen into obscurity in the West.
It was in their new focus on literary and historical texts that Renaissance scholars differed so markedly from the medieval scholars of the Renaissance of the 12th century, who had focused on studying Greek and Arabic works of natural sciences, philosophy, and mathematics, rather than on such cultural texts.
In the revival of neoplatonism, Renaissance humanists did not reject Christianity; on the contrary, many of the Renaissance's greatest works were devoted to it, and the Church patronized many works of Renaissance art.
But a subtle shift took place in the way that intellectuals approached religion that was reflected in many other areas of cultural life.
In addition, many Greek Christian works, including the Greek New Testament, were brought back from Byzantium to Western Europe and engaged Western scholars for the first time since late antiquity.
This new engagement with Greek Christian works, and particularly the return to the original Greek of the New Testament promoted by humanists Lorenzo Valla and Erasmus, helped pave the way for the Reformation.
Well after the first artistic return to classicism had been exemplified in the sculpture of Nicola Pisano, Florentine painters led by Masaccio strove to portray the human form realistically, developing techniques to render perspective and light more naturally.
Political philosophers, most famously Niccolò Machiavelli, sought to describe political life as it really was, that is, to understand it rationally.
A critical contribution to Italian Renaissance humanism, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola wrote De hominis dignitate (Oration on the Dignity of Man, 1486), a series of theses on philosophy, natural thought, faith, and magic defended against any opponent on the grounds of reason.
In addition to studying classical Latin and Greek, Renaissance authors also began increasingly to use vernacular languages; combined with the introduction of the printing press, this allowed many more people access to books, especially the Bible.
In all, the Renaissance can be viewed as an attempt by intellectuals to study and improve the secular and worldly, both through the revival of ideas from antiquity and through novel approaches to thought.
Political philosopher Hans Kohn describes it as an age where "Men looked for new foundations"; some like Erasmus and Thomas More envisioned new reformed spiritual foundations, others, in the words of Machiavelli, una lunga sperienza delle cose moderne ed una continua lezione delle antiche (a long experience with modern life and a continuous learning from antiquity).
Sociologist Rodney Stark plays down the Renaissance in favor of the earlier innovations of the Italian city-states in the High Middle Ages, which married responsive government, Christianity and the birth of capitalism.
This analysis argues that, whereas the great European states (France and Spain) were absolute monarchies, and others were under direct Church control, the independent city-republics of Italy took over the principles of capitalism invented on monastic estates and set off a vast unprecedented Commercial Revolution that preceded and financed the Renaissance.
Historian Leon Poliakov offers a critical view in his seminal study of European racist thought: The Aryan Myth.
According to Poliakov, the use of ethnic origin myths are first used by Renaissance humanists "in the service of a new born chauvinism".
Many argue that the ideas characterizing the Renaissance had their origin in Florence at the turn of the 13th and 14th centuries, in particular with the writings of Dante Alighieri (1265–1321) and Petrarch (1304–1374), as well as the paintings of Giotto di Bondone (1267–1337).
Some writers date the Renaissance quite precisely; one proposed starting point is 1401, when the rival geniuses Lorenzo Ghiberti and Filippo Brunelleschi competed for the contract to build the bronze doors for the Baptistery of the Florence Cathedral (Ghiberti won).
Others see more general competition between artists and polymaths such as Brunelleschi, Ghiberti, Donatello, and Masaccio for artistic commissions as sparking the creativity of the Renaissance.
Yet it remains much debated why the Renaissance began in Italy, and why it began when it did.
Accordingly, several theories have been put forward to explain its origins.
Peter Rietbergen posits that various influential Proto-Renaissance movements started from roughly 1300 onwards across many regions of Europe.
In stark contrast to the High Middle Ages, when Latin scholars focused almost entirely on studying Greek and Arabic works of natural science, philosophy and mathematics, Renaissance scholars were most interested in recovering and studying Latin and Greek literary, historical, and oratorical texts.
Broadly speaking, this began in the 14th century with a Latin phase, when Renaissance scholars such as Petrarch, Coluccio Salutati (1331–1406), Niccolò de' Niccoli (1364–1437), and Poggio Bracciolini (1380–1459) scoured the libraries of Europe in search of works by such Latin authors as Cicero, Lucretius, Livy, and Seneca.
By the early 15th century, the bulk of the surviving such Latin literature had been recovered; the Greek phase of Renaissance humanism was under way, as Western European scholars turned to recovering ancient Greek literary, historical, oratorical and theological texts.
Unlike with Latin texts, which had been preserved and studied in Western Europe since late antiquity, the study of ancient Greek texts was very limited in medieval Western Europe.
Ancient Greek works on science, mathematics, and philosophy had been studied since the High Middle Ages in Western Europe and in the Islamic Golden Age (normally in translation), but Greek literary, oratorical and historical works (such as Homer, the Greek dramatists, Demosthenes and Thucydides) were not studied in either the Latin or medieval Islamic worlds; in the Middle Ages these sorts of texts were only studied by Byzantine scholars.
Some argue that the Timurid Renaissance in Samarkand and Herat, whose magnificence toned with Florence as the center of a cultural rebirth, were linked to the Ottoman Empire, whose conquests led to the migration of Greek scholars to Italian cities.
One of the greatest achievements of Renaissance scholars was to bring this entire class of Greek cultural works back into Western Europe for the first time since late antiquity.
Muslim logicians, most notably Avicenna and Averroes, had inherited Greek ideas after they had invaded and conquered Egypt and the Levant.
Their translations and commentaries on these ideas worked their way through the Arab West into Iberia and Sicily, which became important centers for this transmission of ideas.
Between the 11th and 13th centuries, many schools dedicated to the translation of philosophical and scientific works from Classical Arabic to Medieval Latin were established in Iberia, most notably the Toledo School of Translators.
This work of translation from Islamic culture, though largely unplanned and disorganized, constituted one of the greatest transmissions of ideas in history.
The movement to reintegrate the regular study of Greek literary, historical, oratorical, and theological texts back into the Western European curriculum is usually dated to the 1396 invitation from Coluccio Salutati to the Byzantine diplomat and scholar Manuel Chrysoloras (c.
This legacy was continued by a number of expatriate Greek scholars, from Basilios Bessarion to Leo Allatius.
The unique political structures of Italy during the Late Middle Ages have led some to theorize that its unusual social climate allowed the emergence of a rare cultural efflorescence.
Italy did not exist as a political entity in the early modern period.
Instead, it was divided into smaller city-states and territories: the Neapolitans controlled the south, the Florentines and the Romans at the center, the Milanese and the Genoese to the north and west respectively, and the Venetians to the north east.
Many of its cities stood among the ruins of ancient Roman buildings; it seems likely that the classical nature of the Renaissance was linked to its origin in the Roman Empire's heartland.
Historian and political philosopher Quentin Skinner points out that Otto of Freising (c.
Linked to this was anti-monarchical thinking, represented in the famous early Renaissance fresco cycle The Allegory of Good and Bad Government by Ambrogio Lorenzetti (painted 1338–1340), whose strong message is about the virtues of fairness, justice, republicanism and good administration.
Holding both Church and Empire at bay, these city republics were devoted to notions of liberty.
Skinner reports that there were many defences of liberty such as the Matteo Palmieri (1406–1475) celebration of Florentine genius not only in art, sculpture and architecture, but "the remarkable efflorescence of moral, social and political philosophy that occurred in Florence at the same time".
Even cities and states beyond central Italy, such as the Republic of Florence at this time, were also notable for their merchant republics, especially the Republic of Venice.
Although in practice these were oligarchical, and bore little resemblance to a modern democracy, they did have democratic features and were responsive states, with forms of participation in governance and belief in liberty.
The relative political freedom they afforded was conducive to academic and artistic advancement.
Likewise, the position of Italian cities such as Venice as great trading centres made them intellectual crossroads.
Merchants brought with them ideas from far corners of the globe, particularly the Levant.
Venice was Europe's gateway to trade with the East, and a producer of fine glass, while Florence was a capital of textiles.
The wealth such business brought to Italy meant large public and private artistic projects could be commissioned and individuals had more leisure time for study.
One theory that has been advanced is that the devastation in Florence caused by the Black Death, which hit Europe between 1348 and 1350, resulted in a shift in the world view of people in 14th century Italy.
Italy was particularly badly hit by the plague, and it has been speculated that the resulting familiarity with death caused thinkers to dwell more on their lives on Earth, rather than on spirituality and the afterlife.
It has also been argued that the Black Death prompted a new wave of piety, manifested in the sponsorship of religious works of art.
However, this does not fully explain why the Renaissance occurred specifically in Italy in the 14th century.
The Black Death was a pandemic that affected all of Europe in the ways described, not only Italy.
The Renaissance's emergence in Italy was most likely the result of the complex interaction of the above factors.
The plague was carried by fleas on sailing vessels returning from the ports of Asia, spreading quickly due to lack of proper sanitation: the population of England, then about 4.
Florence's population was nearly halved in the year 1348.
As a result of the decimation in the populace the value of the working class increased, and commoners came to enjoy more freedom.
To answer the increased need for labor, workers traveled in search of the most favorable position economically.
The demographic decline due to the plague had economic consequences: the prices of food dropped and land values declined by 30–40% in most parts of Europe between 1350 and 1400.
Landholders faced a great loss, but for ordinary men and women it was a windfall.
The survivors of the plague found not only that the prices of food were cheaper but also that lands were more abundant, and many of them inherited property from their dead relatives.
The spread of disease was significantly more rampant in areas of poverty.
Epidemics ravaged cities, particularly children.
Plagues were easily spread by lice, unsanitary drinking water, armies, or by poor sanitation.
Children were hit the hardest because many diseases, such as typhus and congenital syphilis, target the immune system, leaving young children without a fighting chance.
Children in city dwellings were more affected by the spread of disease than the children of the wealthy.
The Black Death caused greater upheaval to Florence's social and political structure than later epidemics.
Despite a significant number of deaths among members of the ruling classes, the government of Florence continued to function during this period.
Formal meetings of elected representatives were suspended during the height of the epidemic due to the chaotic conditions in the city, but a small group of officials was appointed to conduct the affairs of the city, which ensured continuity of government.
It has long been a matter of debate why the Renaissance began in Florence, and not elsewhere in Italy.
Scholars have noted several features unique to Florentine cultural life that may have caused such a cultural movement.
Many have emphasized the role played by the Medici, a banking family and later ducal ruling house, in patronizing and stimulating the arts.
Some historians have postulated that Florence was the birthplace of the Renaissance as a result of luck, i.
Arguing that such chance seems improbable, other historians have contended that these "Great Men" were only able to rise to prominence because of the prevailing cultural conditions at the time.
Lorenzo de' Medici (1449–1492) was the catalyst for an enormous amount of arts patronage, encouraging his countrymen to commission works from the leading artists of Florence, including Leonardo da Vinci, Sandro Botticelli, and Michelangelo Buonarroti.
Works by Neri di Bicci, Botticelli, Leonardo, and Filippino Lippi had been commissioned additionally by the Convent of San Donato in Scopeto in Florence.
The Renaissance was certainly underway before Lorenzo de' Medici came to power – indeed, before the Medici family itself achieved hegemony in Florentine society.
In some ways, Renaissance humanism was not a philosophy but a method of learning.
In contrast to the medieval scholastic mode, which focused on resolving contradictions between authors, Renaissance humanists would study ancient texts in their original languages and appraise them through a combination of reasoning and empirical evidence.
Humanist education was based on the programme of Studia Humanitatis, the study of five humanities: poetry, grammar, history, moral philosophy, and rhetoric.
Although historians have sometimes struggled to define humanism precisely, most have settled on "a middle of the road definition.
Above all, humanists asserted "the genius of man .
Humanist scholars shaped the intellectual landscape throughout the early modern period.
Political philosophers such as Niccolò Machiavelli and Thomas More revived the ideas of Greek and Roman thinkers and applied them in critiques of contemporary government, following the Islamic steps of Ibn Khaldun.
Pico della Mirandola wrote the "manifesto" of the Renaissance, the Oration on the Dignity of Man, a vibrant defence of thinking.
Matteo Palmieri (1406–1475), another humanist, is most known for his work Della vita civile ("On Civic Life"; printed 1528), which advocated civic humanism, and for his influence in refining the Tuscan vernacular to the same level as Latin.
Palmieri drew on Roman philosophers and theorists, especially Cicero, who, like Palmieri, lived an active public life as a citizen and official, as well as a theorist and philosopher and also Quintilian.
Perhaps the most succinct expression of his perspective on humanism is in a 1465 poetic work La città di vita, but an earlier work, Della vita civile, is more wide-ranging.
Composed as a series of dialogues set in a country house in the Mugello countryside outside Florence during the plague of 1430, Palmieri expounds on the qualities of the ideal citizen.
The dialogues include ideas about how children develop mentally and physically, how citizens can conduct themselves morally, how citizens and states can ensure probity in public life, and an important debate on the difference between that which is pragmatically useful and that which is honest.
The humanists believed that it is important to transcend to the afterlife with a perfect mind and body, which could be attained with education.
The purpose of humanism was to create a universal man whose person combined intellectual and physical excellence and who was capable of functioning honorably in virtually any situation.
This ideology was referred to as the uomo universale, an ancient Greco-Roman ideal.
Education during the Renaissance was mainly composed of ancient literature and history as it was thought that the classics provided moral instruction and an intensive understanding of human behavior.
A unique characteristic of some Renaissance libraries is that they were open to the public.
These libraries were places where ideas were exchanged and where scholarship and reading were considered both pleasurable and beneficial to the mind and soul.
As freethinking was a hallmark of the age, many libraries contained a wide range of writers.
Classical texts could be found alongside humanist writings.
These informal associations of intellectuals profoundly influenced Renaissance culture.
An essential tool of Renaissance librarianship was the catalog that listed, described, and classified a library's books.
Some of the richest "bibliophiles" built libraries as temples to books and knowledge.
A number of libraries appeared as manifestations of immense wealth joined with a love of books.
In some cases, cultivated library builders were also committed to offering others the opportunity to use their collections.
Prominent aristocrats and princes of the Church created great libraries for the use of their courts, called "court libraries", and were housed in lavishly designed monumental buildings decorated with ornate woodwork, and the walls adorned with frescoes (Murray, Stuart A.
Renaissance art marks a cultural rebirth at the close of the Middle Ages and rise of the Modern world.
One of the distinguishing features of Renaissance art was its development of highly realistic linear perspective.
Giotto di Bondone (1267–1337) is credited with first treating a painting as a window into space, but it was not until the demonstrations of architect Filippo Brunelleschi (1377–1446) and the subsequent writings of Leon Battista Alberti (1404–1472) that perspective was formalized as an artistic technique.
The development of perspective was part of a wider trend toward realism in the arts.
Painters developed other techniques, studying light, shadow, and, famously in the case of Leonardo da Vinci, human anatomy.
Underlying these changes in artistic method was a renewed desire to depict the beauty of nature and to unravel the axioms of aesthetics, with the works of Leonardo, Michelangelo and Raphael representing artistic pinnacles that were much imitated by other artists.
Other notable artists include Sandro Botticelli, working for the Medici in Florence, Donatello, another Florentine, and Titian in Venice, among others.
In the Low Countries, a particularly vibrant artistic culture developed.
The work of Hugo van der Goes and Jan van Eyck was particularly influential on the development of painting in Italy, both technically with the introduction of oil paint and canvas, and stylistically in terms of naturalism in representation.
Later, the work of Pieter Brueghel the Elder would inspire artists to depict themes of everyday life.
In architecture, Filippo Brunelleschi was foremost in studying the remains of ancient classical buildings.
With rediscovered knowledge from the 1st-century writer Vitruvius and the flourishing discipline of mathematics, Brunelleschi formulated the Renaissance style that emulated and improved on classical forms.
His major feat of engineering was building the dome of Florence Cathedral.
Another building demonstrating this style is the Basilica of Sant'Andrea, Mantua, built by Alberti.
The outstanding architectural work of the High Renaissance was the rebuilding of St.
Peter's Basilica, combining the skills of Bramante, Michelangelo, Raphael, Sangallo and Maderno.
During the Renaissance, architects aimed to use columns, pilasters, and entablatures as an integrated system.
The Roman orders types of columns are used: Tuscan and Composite.
These can either be structural, supporting an arcade or architrave, or purely decorative, set against a wall in the form of pilasters.
One of the first buildings to use pilasters as an integrated system was in the Old Sacristy (1421–1440) by Brunelleschi.
Arches, semi-circular or (in the Mannerist style) segmental, are often used in arcades, supported on piers or columns with capitals.
There may be a section of entablature between the capital and the springing of the arch.
Alberti was one of the first to use the arch on a monumental.
Renaissance vaults do not have ribs; they are semi-circular or segmental and on a square plan, unlike the Gothic vault, which is frequently rectangular.
Renaissance artists were not pagans, although they admired antiquity and kept some ideas and symbols of the medieval past.
His Annunciation, from the Pisa Baptistry, demonstrates that classical models influenced Italian art before the Renaissance took root as a literary movement.
From a single print shop in Mainz, Germany around 1440, the movable type printing-press had spread to no less than around 270 cities in Central, Western and Eastern Europe and had already produced more than 20 million volumes by the end of the 15th century.
Printing made scholarly books more widely accessible, allowing researchers to consult ancient texts freely and to compare their own observations with those of fellow scholars.
Printing ended the manuscript culture of the Middle Ages, where facts were few and far between, and replaced it with a printing culture where reliable and documented facts rapidly proliferated and became the secure foundation for scientific knowledge.
In 1492, Christopher Columbus sailed across the Atlantic Ocean from Spain seeking a direct route to India of the Delhi Sultanate.
He accidentally stumbled upon the Americas, but believed he had reached the East Indies.
Between 1519 and 1522, the Magellan–Elcano expedition achieved the first circumnavigation of Earth in history, including the first crossing of the Pacific by a European expedition, revealing the vast scale of that ocean.
Every continent was visited and mostly mapped by Europeans, except the south polar continent now known as Antarctica.
This development is depicted in the large world map Nova Totius Terrarum Orbis Tabula made by the Dutch cartographer Joan Blaeu in 1648 to commemorate the Peace of Westphalia.
The discovery of continents that were completely unknown to the ancients had a profound impact on European intellectual life in the 16th century.
By revealing a "New World" unknown to the ancients, the European encounter with the Americas also specifically undermined the authority of Claudius Ptolemy, the 2nd-century scholar whose geographic and astronomical models had long been considered infallible.
The new ideals of humanism, although more secular in some aspects, developed against a Christian backdrop, especially in the Northern Renaissance.
Much, if not most, of the new art was commissioned by or in dedication to the Roman Catholic Church.
However, the Renaissance had a profound effect on contemporary theology, particularly in the way people perceived the relationship between man and God.
Many of the period's foremost theologians were followers of the humanist method, including Erasmus, Huldrych Zwingli, Thomas More, Martin Luther, and John Calvin.
The Renaissance began in times of religious turmoil.
The Late Middle Ages was a period of political intrigue surrounding the Papacy, culminating in the Western Schism, in which three men simultaneously claimed to be true Bishop of Rome.
While the schism was resolved by the Council of Constance (1414), a resulting reform movement known as Conciliarism sought to limit the power of the pope.
Although the papacy eventually emerged supreme in ecclesiastical matters by the Fifth Council of the Lateran (1511), it was dogged by continued accusations of corruption, most famously in the person of Pope Alexander VI, who was accused variously of simony, nepotism, and fathering children (most of whom were married off, presumably for the consolidation of power) while a cardinal.
Churchmen such as Erasmus and Luther proposed reform to the Church, often based on humanist textual criticism of the New Testament.
In October 1517, Luther published the Ninety-five Theses, challenging papal authority and criticizing its perceived corruption, particularly with regard to instances of sold indulgences.
The 95 Theses led to the Reformation, a break with the Roman Catholic Church that previously claimed hegemony in Western Europe.
Humanism and the Renaissance therefore played a direct role in sparking the Reformation, as well as in many other contemporaneous religious debates and conflicts.
Pope Paul III came to the papal throne (1534–1549) after the sack of Rome in 1527, with uncertainties prevalent in the Catholic Church following the Reformation.
Nicolaus Copernicus dedicated De revolutionibus orbium coelestium (On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres) to Paul III, who became the grandfather of Alessandro Farnese, who had paintings by Titian, Michelangelo, and Raphael, as well as an important collection of drawings, and who commissioned the masterpiece of Giulio Clovio, arguably the last major illuminated manuscript, the Farnese Hours.
In the first period of the Italian Renaissance, humanists favored the study of humanities over natural philosophy or applied mathematics, and their reverence for classical sources further enshrined the Aristotelian and Ptolemaic views of the universe.
Writing around 1450, Nicholas of Cusa claimed that the universe must be infinite in extent and therefore devoid of a center.
Natural philosophy and art were intermingled in the early Renaissance, with polymath artists such as Leonardo da Vinci making observational drawings of anatomy and nature.
Leonardo set up controlled experiments in water flow, medical dissection, and systematic study of movement and aerodynamics, and he devised principles of research method that led Fritjof Capra to classify him as the "father of modern science".
Other examples of Da Vinci's contribution during this period include machines designed to saw marbles and lift monoliths, and new discoveries in acoustics, botany, geology, anatomy, and mechanics.
As the Reformation and Counter-Reformation clashed, the Northern Renaissance showed a decisive shift in focus from Aristotelian natural philosophy to chemistry and the biological sciences (botany, anatomy, and medicine).
Nikolas Copernicus, in De revolutionibus orbium coelestium (On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres), posited that the Earth moved around the Sun.
Applied innovation extended to commerce.
At the end of the 15th century, Luca Pacioli published the first work on bookkeeping, making him the founder of accounting.
References to Greek Antiquity appeared in medical texts and theories specifically to Aristotle, Plato, and skepticism.
The most prominent classical focus in medicine was to Hippocrates (460-370 BCE) and Galen (129-216).
Realist art blended with anatomical advancements in medicine.
Medical scholars enlisted artists to create new works.
Andreas Vesalius (1514-64), a Flemish physician, published the De humani corporis fabrica libri septem in 1543.
It was an anatomical encyclopedia renowned for its accurate drawings of the human anatomy.
It became the basis for Renaissance anatomy as it was the most detailed account of the human body written.
Another writer of anatomy was Jacopo Berengario da Carpi (d.
The intense focus on classic theory was not without pushback, most notably from Vesalius in his critiques of Galen in various texts.
Despite this new scholarship, the heart of these works was still Galen's humoral theory and therapeutics, which would continue for many centuries.
The focus on anatomy was partly a continued response to humanism, while simultaneously highlighting observation and description.
Dissections became more frequent and prestigious, while autopsies gained relevance in medical education.
New surgical techniques developed, and there was a new interest in alchemical/chymiatric methods as a result of the focus on empirical knowledge.
New movements sprang up, completely devoted to the study of chemical and alchemical medicine.
The Paracelsian movement was inspired by the chemical physician Paracelsus (1493-1541), and it emphasized producing transformative and life-prolonging remedies.
This movement rejected Galenic humoral theory in favor of a chemical understanding of medicine.
The Paracelsian movement was controversial, especially to universities and scholastic physicians.
Written works and texts remained central to the medical field.
The invention of the printing press in 1457 allowed for medical treatises to be reproduced more quickly and in vernacular languages, which widened the literate field beyond elites and religious figures.
Johannes Oporinus was one of the most famous Renaissance publishers of medicine.
The printing press aided the growing focus on natural medicine by publishing textbooks on plants and botany.
Leonhart Fuchs, a German herbalist, published his treatise on medical botany, “De Historia Stirpium,” in 1542.
In 1544, Pietro Andrea Mattioli published his commentary on Dioscorides, an ancient Greek physician and botanist.
Fuchs was the first herbalist to describe American plant introductions like maize.
The Spanish and Portuguese exploration of the Americas opened up new herbs and remedies to Renaissance Medicine, as well as diseases.
The wood from the Guaiac tree was imported as early as 1508 from the Caribbean to be used against the new world disease sweeping Europe.
The disease was syphilis, and as reported by the humanist Ulrich von Hutten, Guaiac could be used as a cure for the pains of the disease.
As contact with the Americas expanded, the record of American herbs and remedies grew.
In 1570, King Phillip II appointed Francisco Hernandez as chief physician of New Spain.
However, the large-scale importation of exotic drugs from the New World did not take root until the last decade of the 16th century.
From this changing society emerged a common, unifying musical language, in particular the polyphonic style of the Franco-Flemish school.
The development of printing made distribution of music possible on a wide scale.
Demand for music as entertainment and as an activity for educated amateurs increased with the emergence of a bourgeois class.
Dissemination of chansons, motets, and masses throughout Europe coincided with the unification of polyphonic practice into the fluid style that culminated in the second half of the sixteenth century in the work of composers such as Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina, Orlande de Lassus, Tomás Luis de Victoria, and William Byrd.
By the 15th century, writers, artists, and architects in Italy were well aware of the transformations that were taking place and were using phrases such as modi antichi (in the antique manner) or alle romana et alla antica (in the manner of the Romans and the ancients) to describe their work.
In the 1330s Petrarch referred to pre-Christian times as antiqua (ancient) and to the Christian period as nova (new).
From Petrarch's Italian perspective, this new period (which included his own time) was an age of national eclipse.
Leonardo Bruni was the first to use tripartite periodization in his History of the Florentine People (1442).
Bruni's first two periods were based on those of Petrarch, but he added a third period because he believed that Italy was no longer in a state of decline.
Flavio Biondo used a similar framework in Decades of History from the Deterioration of the Roman Empire (1439–1453).
Humanist historians argued that contemporary scholarship restored direct links to the classical period, thus bypassing the Medieval period, which they then named for the first time the "Middle Ages".
The term first appears in Latin in 1469 as media tempestas (middle times).
The term rinascita (rebirth) first appeared, however, in its broad sense in Giorgio Vasari's Lives of the Artists, 1550, revised 1568.
Vasari divides the age into three phases: the first phase contains Cimabue, Giotto, and Arnolfo di Cambio; the second phase contains Masaccio, Brunelleschi, and Donatello; the third centers on Leonardo da Vinci and culminates with Michelangelo.
It was not just the growing awareness of classical antiquity that drove this development, according to Vasari, but also the growing desire to study and imitate nature.
In the 15th century, the Renaissance spread rapidly from its birthplace in Florence to the rest of Italy and soon to the rest of Europe.
The invention of the printing press by German printer Johannes Gutenberg allowed the rapid transmission of these new ideas.
As it spread, its ideas diversified and changed, being adapted to local culture.
In the 20th century, scholars began to break the Renaissance into regional and national movements.
The Elizabethan era in the second half of the 16th century is usually regarded as the height of the English Renaissance.
Many scholars see its beginnings in the early 16th century during the reign of Henry VIII.
The English Renaissance is different from the Italian Renaissance in several ways.
The dominant art forms of the English Renaissance were literature and music, which had a rich flowering.
Visual arts in the English Renaissance were much less significant than in the Italian Renaissance.
The English Renaissance period in art began far later than the Italian, which had moved into Mannerism by the 1530s.
In literature the later part of the 16th century saw the flowering of Elizabethan literature, with poetry heavily influenced by Italian Renaissance literature but Elizabethan theatre a distinctive native style.
Writers include William Shakespeare (1564–1616), Christopher Marlowe (1564–1593), Edmund Spenser (1552–1599), Sir Thomas More (1478–1535), and Sir Philip Sidney (1554–1586).
English Renaissance music competed with that in Europe with composers such as Thomas Tallis (1505–1585), John Taverner (1490–1545), and William Byrd (1540–1623).
Elizabethan architecture produced the large prodigy houses of courtiers, and in the next century Inigo Jones (1573–1652), who introduced Palladian architecture to England.
Elsewhere, Sir Francis Bacon (1561–1626) was the pioneer of modern scientific thought, and is commonly regarded as one of the founders of the Scientific Revolution.
The word "Renaissance" is borrowed from the French language, where it means "re-birth".
It was first used in the eighteenth century and was later popularized by French historian Jules Michelet (1798–1874) in his 1855 work, Histoire de France (History of France).
In 1495 the Italian Renaissance arrived in France, imported by King Charles VIII after his invasion of Italy.
A factor that promoted the spread of secularism was the inability of the Church to offer assistance against the Black Death.
Francis I imported Italian art and artists, including Leonardo da Vinci, Primaticcio, Rosso Fiorentino, Niccolò dell'Abbate and Benvenuto Cellini and built ornate palaces at great expense, like the Palace of Fontainebleau and the castle of Chambord.
Writers such as François Rabelais, Pierre de Ronsard, Joachim du Bellay, and Michel de Montaigne, painters such as Jean Clouet and François Clouet, and musicians such as Jean Mouton also borrowed from the spirit of the Renaissance.
French Renaissance sculptors include Michel Colombe, Jean Goujon, Pierre Bontemps, Ligier Richier and Germain Pilon while important architects of the time were Pierre Lescot, who built the Henri II aisle of the Louvre, Philibert Delorme and Jacques I Androuet du Cerceau.
In 1533, a fourteen-year-old Catherine de' Medici (1519–1589), born in Florence to Lorenzo de' Medici, Duke of Urbino and Madeleine de La Tour d'Auvergne, married Henry II of France, second son of King Francis I and Queen Claude.
Though she became famous and infamous for her role in the French Wars of Religion, she made a direct contribution in bringing arts, sciences, and music (including the origins of ballet) to the French court from her native Florence.
In the second half of the 15th century, the Renaissance spirit spread to Germany and the Low Countries, where the development of the printing press (ca.
In the early Protestant areas of the country humanism became closely linked to the turmoil of the Reformation, and the art and writing of the German Renaissance frequently reflected this dispute.
However, the Gothic style and medieval scholastic philosophy remained exclusively until the turn of the 16th century.
Emperor Maximilian I of Habsburg (ruling 1493–1519) was the first truly Renaissance monarch of the Holy Roman Empire.
After Italy, Hungary was the first European country where the Renaissance appeared.
The Renaissance style came directly from Italy during the Quattrocento (1400s) to Hungary first in the Central European region, thanks to the development of early Hungarian-Italian relationships — not only in dynastic connections, but also in cultural, humanistic and commercial relations – growing in strength from the 14th century.
The relationship between Hungarian and Italian Gothic styles was a second reason – exaggerated breakthrough of walls is avoided, preferring clean and light structures.
Large-scale building schemes provided ample and long term work for the artists, for example, the building of the Friss (New) Castle in Buda, the castles of Visegrád, Tata, and Várpalota.
In Sigismund's court there were patrons such as Pippo Spano, a descendant of the Scolari family of Florence, who invited Manetto Ammanatini and Masolino da Pannicale to Hungary.
The new Italian trend combined with existing national traditions to create a particular local Renaissance art.
Acceptance of Renaissance art was furthered by the continuous arrival of humanist thought in the country.
Many young Hungarians studying at Italian universities came closer to the Florentine humanist center, so a direct connection with Florence evolved.
The growing number of Italian traders moving to Hungary, specially to Buda, helped this process.
New thoughts were carried by the humanist prelates, among them Vitéz János, archbishop of Esztergom, one of the founders of Hungarian humanism.
During the long reign of Emperor Sigismund of Luxemburg the Royal Castle of Buda became probably the largest Gothic palace of the late Middle Ages.
King Matthias Corvinus (r.
After the marriage in 1476 of King Matthias to Beatrice of Naples, Buda became one of the most important artistic centers of the Renaissance north of the Alps.
The most important humanists living in Matthias' court were Antonio Bonfini and the famous Hungarian poet Janus Pannonius.
András Hess set up a printing press in Buda in 1472.
Matthias Corvinus's library, the Bibliotheca Corviniana, was Europe's greatest collections of secular books: historical chronicles, philosophic and scientific works in the 15th century.
His library was second only in size to the Vatican Library.
Corvinus's library is part of UNESCO World Heritage.
Matthias started at least two major building projects.
The works in Buda and Visegrád began in about 1479.
Two new wings and a hanging garden were built at the royal castle of Buda, and the palace at Visegrád was rebuilt in Renaissance style.
Matthias appointed the Italian Chimenti Camicia and the Dalmatian Giovanni Dalmata to direct these projects.
Matthias commissioned the leading Italian artists of his age to embellish his palaces: for instance, the sculptor Benedetto da Majano and the painters Filippino Lippi and Andrea Mantegna worked for him.
A copy of Mantegna's portrait of Matthias survived.
Matthias also hired the Italian military engineer Aristotele Fioravanti to direct the rebuilding of the forts along the southern frontier.
He had new monasteries built in Late Gothic style for the Franciscans in Kolozsvár, Szeged and Hunyad, and for the Paulines in Fejéregyháza.
In the spring of 1485, Leonardo da Vinci travelled to Hungary on behalf of Sforza to meet King Matthias Corvinus, and was commissioned by him to paint a Madonna.
Matthias enjoyed the company of Humanists and had lively discussions on various topics with them.
The fame of his magnanimity encouraged many scholars—mostly Italian—to settle in Buda.
Antonio Bonfini, Pietro Ranzano, Bartolomeo Fonzio, and Francesco Bandini spent many years in Matthias's court.
This circle of educated men introduced the ideas of Neoplatonism to Hungary.
Like all intellectuals of his age, Matthias was convinced that the movements and combinations of the stars and planets exercised influence on individuals' life and on the history of nations.
Martius Galeotti described him as "king and astrologer", and Antonio Bonfini said Matthias "never did anything without consulting the stars".
Upon his request, the famous astronomers of the age, Johannes Regiomontanus and Marcin Bylica, set up an observatory in Buda and installed it with astrolabes and celestial globes.
Regiomontanus dedicated his book on navigation that was used by Christopher Columbus to Matthias.
Other important figures of Hungarian Renaissance include Bálint Balassi (poet), Sebestyén Tinódi Lantos (poet), Bálint Bakfark (composer and lutenist), and Master MS (fresco painter).
Culture in the Netherlands at the end of the 15th century was influenced by the Italian Renaissance through trade via Bruges, which made Flanders wealthy.
Its nobles commissioned artists who became known across Europe.
In science, the anatomist Andreas Vesalius led the way; in cartography, Gerardus Mercator's map assisted explorers and navigators.
In art, Dutch and Flemish Renaissance painting ranged from the strange work of Hieronymus Bosch to the everyday life depictions of Pieter Brueghel the Elder.
Erasmus was arguably the Netherlands' best known humanist and Catholic intellectual during the Renaissance.
The Renaissance in Northern Europe has been termed the "Northern Renaissance".
While Renaissance ideas were moving north from Italy, there was a simultaneous southward spread of some areas of innovation, particularly in music.
The music of the 15th-century Burgundian School defined the beginning of the Renaissance in music, and the polyphony of the Netherlanders, as it moved with the musicians themselves into Italy, formed the core of the first true international style in music since the standardization of Gregorian Chant in the 9th century.
The culmination of the Netherlandish school was in the music of the Italian composer Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina.
At the end of the 16th century Italy again became a center of musical innovation, with the development of the polychoral style of the Venetian School, which spread northward into Germany around 1600.
In Denmark, the Renaissance sparked the translation of the works of Saxo Grammaticus into Danish as well as Frederick II and Christian IV ordering the redecoration or construction of several important works of architecture, i.
Kronborg, Rosenborg and Børsen.
The paintings of the Italian Renaissance differed from those of the Northern Renaissance.
Italian Renaissance artists were among the first to paint secular scenes, breaking away from the purely religious art of medieval painters.
Northern Renaissance artists initially remained focused on religious subjects, such as the contemporary religious upheaval portrayed by Albrecht Dürer.
Later, the works of Pieter Bruegel the Elder influenced artists to paint scenes of daily life rather than religious or classical themes.
It was also during the Northern Renaissance that Flemish brothers Hubert and Jan van Eyck perfected the oil painting technique, which enabled artists to produce strong colors on a hard surface that could survive for centuries.
A feature of the Northern Renaissance was its use of the vernacular in place of Latin or Greek, which allowed greater freedom of expression.
This movement had started in Italy with the decisive influence of Dante Alighieri on the development of vernacular languages; in fact the focus on writing in Italian has neglected a major source of Florentine ideas expressed in Latin.
The spread of the printing press technology boosted the Renaissance in Northern Europe as elsewhere, with Venice becoming a world center of printing.
The Polish Renaissance lasted from the late 15th to the late 16th century and was the Golden Age of Polish culture.
Ruled by the Jagiellonian dynasty, the Kingdom of Poland (from 1569 known as the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth) actively participated in the broad European Renaissance.
An early Italian humanist who came to Poland in the mid-15th century was Filippo Buonaccorsi, who was employed as royal advisor and councillor.
The tomb of John I Albert, completed in 1505 by Francesco Fiorentino, is the first example of a Renaissance composition in the country.
Many Italian artists subsequently came to Poland with Bona Sforza of Milan, when she married King Sigismund I in 1518.
This was supported by temporarily strengthened monarchies in both areas, as well as by newly established universities.
The Renaissance was a period when the multi-national Polish state experienced a substantial period of cultural growth thanks in part to a century without major wars, aside from conflicts in the sparsely populated eastern and southern borderlands.
Architecture became more refined and decorative.
Mannerism played an important part in shaping what is now considered to be the truly Polish architectural style – high attics above the cornice with pinnacles and pilasters.
It was also the time when the first major works of Polish literature were published, particularly those of Mikołaj Rey and Jan Kochanowski, and the Polish language became the lingua franca of East-Central Europe.
The Jagiellonian University transformed into a major institution of higher education for the region and hosted many notable scholars, chiefly Nicolaus Copernicus and Conrad Celtes.
Three more academies were founded at Königsberg (1544), Vilnius (1579), and Zamość (1594).
The Reformation spread peacefully throughout the country, giving rise to the Nontrinitarian Polish Brethren.
Living conditions improved, cities grew, and exports of agricultural products enriched the population, especially the nobility (szlachta) and magnates.
The nobles gained dominance in the new political system of Golden Liberty, a counterweight to monarchical absolutism.
Although Italian Renaissance had a modest impact in Portuguese arts, Portugal was influential in broadening the European worldview, stimulating humanist inquiry.
Renaissance arrived through the influence of wealthy Italian and Flemish merchants who invested in the profitable commerce overseas.
As the pioneer headquarters of European exploration, Lisbon flourished in the late 15th century, attracting experts who made several breakthroughs in mathematics, astronomy and naval technology, including Pedro Nunes, João de Castro, Abraham Zacuto, and Martin Behaim.
Cartographers Pedro Reinel, Lopo Homem, Estêvão Gomes, and Diogo Ribeiro made crucial advances in mapping the world.
Apothecary Tomé Pires and physicians Garcia de Orta and Cristóvão da Costa collected and published works on plants and medicines, soon translated by Flemish pioneer botanist Carolus Clusius.
In architecture, the huge profits of the spice trade financed a sumptuous composite style in the first decades of the 16th century, the Manueline, incorporating maritime elements.
The primary painters were Nuno Gonçalves, Gregório Lopes, and Vasco Fernandes.
In music, Pedro de Escobar and Duarte Lobo produced four songbooks, including the Cancioneiro de Elvas.
In literature, Luís de Camões inscribed the Portuguese feats overseas in the epic poem Os Lusíadas.
Sá de Miranda introduced Italian forms of verse and Bernardim Ribeiro developed pastoral romance, while plays by Gil Vicente fused it with popular culture, reporting the changing times.
Travel literature especially flourished: João de Barros, Fernão Lopes de Castanheda, António Galvão, Gaspar Correia, Duarte Barbosa, and Fernão Mendes Pinto, among others, described new lands and were translated and spread with the new printing press.
After joining the Portuguese exploration of Brazil in 1500, Amerigo Vespucci coined the term New World, in his letters to Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de' Medici.
The intense international exchange produced several cosmopolitan humanist scholars, including Francisco de Holanda, André de Resende, and Damião de Góis, a friend of Erasmus who wrote with rare independence on the reign of King Manuel I.
Diogo de Gouveia and André de Gouveia made relevant teaching reforms via France.
Foreign news and products in the Portuguese factory in Antwerp attracted the interest of Thomas More and Albrecht Dürer to the wider world.
There, profits and know-how helped nurture the Dutch Renaissance and Golden Age, especially after the arrival of the wealthy cultured Jewish community expelled from Portugal.
The Renaissance arrived in the Iberian peninsula through the Mediterranean possessions of the Crown of Aragon and the city of Valencia.
Many early Spanish Renaissance writers come from the Crown of Aragon, including Ausiàs March and Joanot Martorell.
In the Crown of Castile, the early Renaissance was heavily influenced by the Italian humanism, starting with writers and poets such as Íñigo López de Mendoza, marqués de Santillana, who introduced the new Italian poetry to Spain in the early 15th century.
Other writers, such as Jorge Manrique, Fernando de Rojas, Juan del Encina, Juan Boscán Almogáver, and Garcilaso de la Vega, kept a close resemblance to the Italian canon.
Miguel de Cervantes's masterpiece Don Quixote is credited as the first Western novel.
Renaissance humanism flourished in the early 16th century, with influential writers such as philosopher Juan Luis Vives, grammarian Antonio de Nebrija and natural historian Pedro de Mexía.
The poet and philosopher Luisa de Medrano, celebrated among her Renaissance contemporaries as one of the puellae doctae ("learned girls"), was the first female professor in Europe at the University of Salamanca.
Later Spanish Renaissance tended toward religious themes and mysticism, with poets such as Luis de León, Teresa of Ávila, and John of the Cross, and treated issues related to the exploration of the New World, with chroniclers and writers such as Inca Garcilaso de la Vega and Bartolomé de las Casas, giving rise to a body of work, now known as Spanish Renaissance literature.
The late Renaissance in Spain produced political and religious authors such as Tomás Fernández de Medrano and artists such as El Greco and composers such as Tomás Luis de Victoria and Antonio de Cabezón.
The Italian artist and critic Giorgio Vasari (1511–1574) first used the term rinascita in his book The Lives of the Artists (published 1550).
In the book Vasari attempted to define what he described as a break with the barbarities of Gothic art: the arts (he held) had fallen into decay with the collapse of the Roman Empire and only the Tuscan artists, beginning with Cimabue (1240–1301) and Giotto (1267–1337) began to reverse this decline in the arts.
Vasari saw ancient art as central to the rebirth of Italian art.
However, only in the 19th century did the French word renaissance achieve popularity in describing the self-conscious cultural movement based on revival of Roman models that began in the late 13th century.
French historian Jules Michelet (1798–1874) defined "The Renaissance" in his 1855 work Histoire de France as an entire historical period, whereas previously it had been used in a more limited sense.
For Michelet, the Renaissance was more a development in science than in art and culture.
He asserted that it spanned the period from Columbus to Copernicus to Galileo; that is, from the end of the 15th century to the middle of the 17th century.
Moreover, Michelet distinguished between what he called, "the bizarre and monstrous" quality of the Middle Ages and the democratic values that he, as a vocal Republican, chose to see in its character.
A French nationalist, Michelet also sought to claim the Renaissance as a French movement.
The Swiss historian Jacob Burckhardt (1818–1897) in his The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy (1860), by contrast, defined the Renaissance as the period between Giotto and Michelangelo in Italy, that is, the 14th to mid-16th centuries.
He saw in the Renaissance the emergence of the modern spirit of individuality, which the Middle Ages had stifled.
His book was widely read and became influential in the development of the modern interpretation of the Italian Renaissance.
More recently, some historians have been much less keen to define the Renaissance as a historical age, or even as a coherent cultural movement.
Rather than a period with definitive beginnings and endings and consistent content in between, the Renaissance can be (and occasionally has been) seen as a movement of practices and ideas to which specific groups and identifiable persons variously responded in different times and places.
It would be in this sense a network of diverse, sometimes converging, sometimes conflicting cultures, not a single, time-bound culture.
There is debate about the extent to which the Renaissance improved on the culture of the Middle Ages.
Both Michelet and Burckhardt were keen to describe the progress made in the Renaissance toward the modern age.
Burckhardt likened the change to a veil being removed from man's eyes, allowing him to see clearly.
In the Middle Ages both sides of human consciousness – that which was turned within as that which was turned without – lay dreaming or half awake beneath a common veil.
The veil was woven of faith, illusion, and childish prepossession, through which the world and history were seen clad in strange hues.
Significantly, the artists, writers, and patrons involved in Renaissance cultural movements at the time believed they were living in a new era that was a clean break from the Middle Ages.
Johan Huizinga (1872–1945) acknowledged the existence of the Renaissance but questioned whether it was a positive change.
In his book The Autumn of the Middle Ages, he argued that the Renaissance was a period of decline from the High Middle Ages, destroying much that was important.
The Medieval Latin language, for instance, had evolved greatly from the classical period and was still a living language used in the church and elsewhere.
The Renaissance obsession with classical purity halted its further evolution and saw Latin revert to its classical form.
This view is however somewhat contested by recent studies.
Some Marxist historians prefer to describe the Renaissance in material terms, holding the view that the changes in art, literature, and philosophy were part of a general economic trend from feudalism toward capitalism, resulting in a bourgeois class with leisure time to devote to the arts.
Many historians point out that most of the negative social factors popularly associated with the medieval period – poverty, warfare, religious and political persecution, for example – seem to have worsened in this era, which saw the rise of Machiavellian politics, the Wars of Religion, the corrupt Borgia Popes, and the intensified witch-hunts of the 16th century.
Lopez has contended that it was a period of deep economic recession.
Many people who lived during the Renaissance did not view it as the "golden age" imagined by certain 19th-century authors, but were concerned by these social maladies.
George Sarton and Lynn Thorndike both argued that scientific progress was perhaps less original than has traditionally been supposed.
Finally, historians have begun to consider the word Renaissance to be unnecessarily loaded, implying an unambiguously positive rebirth from the supposedly more primitive "Dark Ages", the Middle Ages.
Most political and economic historians now prefer to use the term "early modern" for this period (and a considerable period afterwards), a designation intended to highlight the period as a transitional one between the Middle Ages and the modern era.
Others such as Roger Osborne have come to consider the Italian Renaissance as a repository of the myths and ideals of western history in general, and instead of rebirth of ancient ideas as a period of great innovation.
It is perhaps no accident that the factuality of the Italian Renaissance has been most vigorously questioned by those who are not obliged to take a professional interest in the aesthetic aspects of civilization – historians of economic and social developments, political and religious situations, and, most particularly, natural science – but only exceptionally by students of literature and hardly ever by historians of Art.
The term Renaissance has also been used to define periods outside of the 15th and 16th centuries in the earlier Medieval period.
Haskins (1870–1937), for example, made a case for a Renaissance of the 12th century.
Other historians have argued for a Carolingian Renaissance in the 8th and 9th centuries, Ottonian Renaissance in the 10th century and for the Timurid Renaissance of the 14th century.
The Islamic Golden Age has been also sometimes termed with the Islamic Renaissance.
The Macedonian Renaissance is a term used for a period in the Roman Empire in the 9th-11th centuries CE.
Other periods of cultural rebirth in Modern times have also been termed "renaissances", such as the Bengal Renaissance, Tamil Renaissance, Nepal Bhasa renaissance, al-Nahda or the Harlem Renaissance.
The term can also be used in cinema.
In animation, the Disney Renaissance is a period that spanned the years from 1989 to 1999 which saw the studio return to the level of quality not witnessed since their Golden Age of Animation.
The San Francisco Renaissance was a vibrant period of exploratory poetry and fiction writing in San Francisco in the mid-20th century.
Symonds, John Addington (1911).
Encyclopædia Britannica.
The Industrial Revolution, sometimes called the First Industrial Revolution in contrast to the subsequent Second Industrial Revolution, was a transitional period of the global economy toward more widespread, efficient and stable manufacturing processes, succeeding the Second Agricultural Revolution.
Beginning in Great Britain around 1760, the Industrial Revolution had spread to continental Europe and the United States by about 1840.
Economic historians agree that the onset of the Industrial Revolution is the most important event in human history, comparable only to the adoption of agriculture with respect to material advancement.
This transition included going from hand production methods to machines; new chemical manufacturing and iron production processes; the increasing use of water power and steam power; the development of machine tools; and rise of the mechanised factory system.
Output greatly increased, and the result was an unprecedented rise in population and population growth.
Many technological and architectural innovations were British.
By the mid-18th century, Britain was the leading commercial nation, with GDP per capita considerably over the world average.
The textile industry was the first to use modern production methods, and textiles became the dominant industry in terms of employment, value of output, and capital invested.
The precise start and end of the Industrial Revolution is debated among historians, as is the pace of economic and social changes.
Rapid adoption of mechanized textiles spinning occurred in Britain in the 1780s, and high rates of growth in steam power and iron production occurred after 1800.
Mechanised textile production spread from Britain to continental Europe and the US in the early 19th century.
A recession occurred from the late 1830s when the adoption of the Industrial Revolution's early innovations, such as mechanised spinning and weaving, slowed as markets matured despite increased adoption of locomotives, steamships, and hot blast iron smelting.
New technologies such as the electrical telegraph, widely introduced in the 1840s in the UK and US, were not sufficient to drive high rates of growth.
Rapid growth reoccurred after 1870, springing from new innovations in the Second Industrial Revolution.
These included steel-making processes, mass production, assembly lines, electrical grid systems, large-scale manufacture of machine tools, and use of advanced machinery in steam-powered factories.
The Industrial Revolution influenced almost every aspect of life.
In particular, average income and population began to exhibit unprecedented sustained growth, with the standard of living improving for most in the Western world, though others have said it did not begin to improve meaningfully until the 20th century.
Prior to the Industrial Revolution, most manufacturing occurred in China and India; after the Industrial Revolution, most manufacturing took place in North America and Western Europe.
The earliest recorded use of "Industrial Revolution" was in 1799 by French envoy Louis-Guillaume Otto, announcing that France had entered the race to industrialise.
Raymond Williams states: "The idea of a new social order based on major industrial change was clear in Southey and Owen, between 1811–18, and was implicit as early as Blake in the early 1790s and Wordsworth at the turn of the [19th] century.
Friedrich Engels in The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844 spoke of "an industrial revolution, a revolution which.
His book was not translated into English until the late 19th century, and the expression did not enter everyday language till then.
Credit for its popularisation is given to Arnold Toynbee, whose 1881 lectures gave a detailed account of the term.
Economic historians such as Mendels, Pomeranz, and Kridte argue proto-industrialisation in parts of Europe, the Islamic world, Mughal India, and China created the social and economic conditions that led to the Industrial Revolution, thus causing the Great Divergence.
Some historians, such as John Clapham and Nicholas Crafts, have argued that the economic and social changes occurred gradually and that revolution is a misnomer.
Several key factors enabled industrialisation.
High agricultural productivity—exemplified by the British Agricultural Revolution—freed up labor and ensured food surpluses.
The presence of skilled managers and entrepreneurs, an extensive network of ports, rivers, canals, and roads for efficient transport, and abundant natural resources such as coal, iron, and water power further supported industrial growth.
Political stability, a legal system favorable to business, and access to financial capital also played crucial roles.
Once industrialisation began in Britain in the 18th century, its spread was facilitated by the eagerness of British entrepreneurs to export industrial methods and the willingness of other nations to adopt them.
By the early 19th century, industrialisation had reached Western Europe and the United States, and by the late 19th century, Japan.
The commencement of the Industrial Revolution is closely linked to a small number of innovations, beginning in the second half of the 18th century.
Textiles – mechanised cotton spinning powered by water, and later steam, increased output per worker by a factor of around 500.
The power loom increased output by a factor of 40.
The cotton gin increased productivity of removing seed from cotton by a factor of 50.
Large gains in productivity occurred in spinning and weaving of wool and linen, but were not as great as in cotton.
Steam power – the efficiency of steam engines increased so they used between one-fifth and one-tenth as much fuel.
The adaptation of stationary steam engines to rotary motion made them suitable for industrial uses.
The high-pressure engine had a high power-to-weight ratio, making it suitable for transportation.
Steam power underwent a rapid expansion after 1800.
Iron-making – the substitution of coke for charcoal greatly lowered the fuel cost of pig iron and wrought iron production.
Using coke also allowed larger blast furnaces, resulting in economies of scale.
The steam engine began being used to power blast air in the 1750s, enabling a large increase in iron production by overcoming the limitation of water power.
The cast iron blowing cylinder was first used in 1760.
It was improved by making it double acting, which allowed higher blast furnace temperatures.
The puddling process produced structural grade iron at lower cost than the finery forge.
The rolling mill was fifteen times faster than hammering wrought iron.
Developed in 1828, hot blast greatly increased fuel efficiency in iron production.
Invention of machine tools – the first machine tools were the screw-cutting lathe, the cylinder boring machine, and the milling machine.
Machine tools made the economical manufacture of precision metal parts possible, although it took decades to develop effective techniques for making interchangeable parts.
In 1750, Britain imported 2.
The work was done by hand in workers' homes or master weavers' shops.
Wages were six times those in India in 1770 when productivity in Britain was three times higher.
In 1787, raw cotton consumption was 22 million pounds, most of which was cleaned, carded, and spun on machines.
The British textile industry used 52 million pounds of cotton in 1800, and 588 million pounds in 1850.
The share of value added by the cotton industry in Britain was 2.
Value added by the woollen industry was 14% in 1801.
Cotton factories numbered about 900 in 1797.
In 1760, approximately one-third of cotton cloth manufactured was exported, rising to two-thirds by 1800.
In 1781, cotton spun amounted to 5 million pounds, which increased to 56 million pounds by 1800.
In 1800, less than 0.
In 1788, there were 50,000 spindles in Britain, rising to 7 million over the next 30 years.
The earliest European attempts at mechanised spinning were with wool; however, wool spinning proved more difficult to mechanise than cotton.
Productivity improvement in wool spinning during the Industrial Revolution was significant, but less than cotton.
Arguably the first highly mechanised factory was John Lombe's water-powered silk mill at Derby, operational by 1721.
Lombe learned silk thread manufacturing by taking a job in Italy and acting as an industrial spy; however, because the Italian silk industry guarded its secrets, the state of the industry at that time is unknown.
Although Lombe's factory was technically successful, the supply of raw silk from Italy was cut off to eliminate competition.
To promote manufacturing, the Crown paid for models of Lombe's machinery which were exhibited in the Tower of London.
Parts of India, China, Central America, South America, and the Middle East have a history of hand-manufacturing cotton textiles, which became a major industry after 1000 AD.
Most cotton was grown by small farmers alongside food and spun in households for domestic consumption.
In the 1400s, China began to require households to pay part of their taxes in cotton cloth.
By the 17th century, almost all Chinese wore cotton clothing, and it could be used as a medium of exchange.
In India, cotton textiles were manufactured for distant markets, often produced by professional weavers.
Cotton was a difficult raw material for Europe to obtain before it was grown on colonial plantations.
Spanish explorers found Native Americans growing sea island (Gossypium barbadense) and upland cotton (Gossypium hirsutum).
Sea island cotton was exported from Barbados from the 1650s.
Upland cotton was uneconomical because of the difficulty of removing seed, a problem solved by the cotton gin.
A strain of cotton seed brought from Mexico to Natchez, Mississippi, in 1806 became the parent genetic material for 90% of world production today; it produced bolls three to four times faster to pick.
The Age of Discovery was followed by colonialism beginning around the 16th century.
Following the discovery of a trade route to India around southern Africa by the Portuguese, the British founded the East India Company, and other countries founded companies, which established trading posts throughout the Indian Ocean region.
A large segment of this trade was in cotton textiles, which were purchased in India and sold in Southeast Asia, including the Indonesian archipelago where spices were purchased for sale to Southeast Asia and Europe.
By the 1760s, cloth was over three-quarters of the East India Company's exports.
Indian textiles were in demand in Europe, where previously only wool and linen were available; however, cotton goods consumed in Europe was minor until the early 19th century.
By 1600, Flemish refugees began weaving cotton in English towns where cottage spinning and weaving of wool and linen was established.
They were left alone by the guilds who did not consider cotton a threat.
Earlier European attempts at cotton spinning and weaving were in 12th-century Italy and 15th-century southern Germany, but these ended when the supply of cotton was cut off.
British cloth could not compete with Indian cloth because India's labour cost was approximately one-fifth that of Britain's.
In 1700 and 1721, the British government passed Calico Acts to protect domestic woollen and linen industries from cotton fabric imported from India.
The demand for heavier fabric was met by a domestic industry based around Lancashire that produced fustian, a cloth with flax warp and cotton weft.
Flax was used for the warp because wheel-spun cotton had insufficient strength, the resulting blend was not as soft as 100% cotton and more difficult to sew.
On the eve of the Industrial Revolution, spinning and weaving were done in households, for domestic consumption, and as a cottage industry under the putting-out system.
Under the putting-out system, home-based workers produced under contract to merchant sellers, who often supplied the raw materials.
In the off-season, the women, typically farmers' wives, did the spinning and the men did the weaving.
Using the spinning wheel, it took 4–8 spinners to supply one handloom weaver.
The flying shuttle, patented in 1733 by John Kay, doubled the output of a weaver, worsening the imbalance between spinning and weaving.
It became widely used around Lancashire after 1760 when John's son, Robert, invented the dropbox, which facilitated changing thread colors.
Lewis Paul patented the roller spinning frame and the flyer-and-bobbin system for drawing wool to a more even thickness.
The technology was developed with John Wyatt of Birmingham.
In 1743, a factory opened in Northampton with 50 spindles on each of five of Paul and Wyatt's machines.
A similar mill was built by Daniel Bourn.
Paul and Bourn patented carding machines in 1748.
Based on two sets of rollers that travelled at different speeds, it was later used in the first cotton spinning mill.
In 1764, in Oswaldtwistle, Lancashire, James Hargreaves invented the spinning jenny.
It was the first practical spinning frame with multiple spindles.
The jenny worked similarly to the spinning wheel, by first clamping down on the fibres, then drawing them out, followed by twisting.
It was a simple, wooden-framed machine that only cost £6 for a 40-spindle model in 1792 and was used mainly by home spinners.
The water frame, was developed by Richard Arkwright, who patented it in 1769.
The design was partly based on a spinning machine built by Kay, hired by Arkwright.
The water frame could produce a hard, medium-count thread suitable for warp, finally allowing 100% cotton cloth to be made in Britain.
Arkwright used water power at a factory in Cromford, Derbyshire in 1771, giving the invention its name.
Samuel Crompton invented the spinning mule in 1779, so called because it is a hybrid of Arkwright's water frame and James Hargreaves's spinning jenny.
Crompton's mule could produce finer thread than hand spinning, at lower cost.
Mule-spun thread was of suitable strength to be used as a warp and allowed Britain to produce highly competitive yarn in large quantities.
Realising expiration of the Arkwright patent would greatly increase the supply of spun cotton and lead to a shortage of weavers, Edmund Cartwright developed a vertical power loom which he patented in 1785.
Samuel Horrocks patented a loom in 1813, which was improved by Richard Roberts in 1822, and these were produced in large numbers by Roberts, Hill & Co.
Roberts was a maker of high-quality machine tools and pioneer in the use of jigs and gauges for precision workshop measurement.
The demand for cotton presented an opportunity to planters in the US, who thought upland cotton would be profitable if a better way could be found to remove the seed.
Eli Whitney responded by inventing the inexpensive cotton gin.
A man using a cotton gin could remove seed in one day, which previously took two months.
These advances were capitalised on by entrepreneurs, of whom the best known is Arkwright.
He is credited with a list of inventions, but these were developed by such people as Kay and Thomas Highs.
Arkwright nurtured the inventors, patented the ideas, financed the initiatives, and protected the machines.
He created the cotton mill which brought the production processes together in a factory, and developed the use of power, which made cotton manufacture a mechanised industry.
Other inventors increased the efficiency of spinning, so the supply of yarn increased greatly.
Steam power was then applied to drive textile machinery.
Manchester acquired the nickname Cottonopolis during the early 19th century owing to its sprawl of textile factories.
Though mechanisation dramatically decreased the cost of cotton cloth, by the mid-19th century machine-woven cloth still could not equal the quality of hand-woven Indian cloth.
However, the high productivity of British textile manufacturing allowed coarser grades of British cloth to undersell hand-spun and woven fabric in low-wage India, destroying the Indian industry.
In the UK in 1720, there were 20,500 tons of charcoal iron and 400 tons with coke.
In 1806, charcoal iron production had dropped to 7,800 tons and coke cast iron was 250,000 tons.
In 1750, the UK imported 31,000 tons of bar iron and either refined from cast iron or directly produced 18,800 tons of bar iron, using charcoal and 100 tons using coke.
In 1796, the UK was making 125,000 tons of bar iron with coke and 6,400 tons with charcoal; imports were 38,000 tons and exports were 24,600 tons.
In 1806 the UK did not import bar iron but exported 31,500 tons.
A major change in the iron industries, during the Industrial Revolution, was the replacement of wood and other bio-fuels with coal.
For a given amount of heat, mining coal required much less labour than cutting wood and converting it to charcoal, and coal was more abundant than wood, supplies of which were becoming scarce before the enormous increase in iron production that took place in the late 18th century.
In 1709, Abraham Darby made progress using coke to fuel his blast furnaces at Coalbrookdale.
However, the coke pig iron made was not suitable for making wrought iron and was used mostly for the production of cast iron goods.
He had the advantage over his rivals in that his pots, cast by his patented process, were thinner and cheaper.
In 1750, coke had replaced charcoal in the smelting of copper and lead and was in widespread use in glass production.
In the smelting and refining of iron, coal and coke produced inferior iron to that made with charcoal because of the coal's sulfur content.
Low sulfur coals were known, but they still contained harmful amounts.
Another factor limiting the iron industry was the scarcity of water power to power blast bellows.
This limitation was overcome by the steam engine.
Use of coal in iron smelting started before the Industrial Revolution, based on innovations by Clement Clerke and others from 1678, using coal reverberatory furnaces known as cupolas.
These were operated by the flames playing on the ore and charcoal or coke mixture, reducing the oxide to metal.
This has the advantage that impurities in the coal do not migrate into the metal.
This technology was applied to lead in 1678, copper in 1687, and iron foundries in the 1690s, but in this case the reverberatory furnace was known as an air furnace.
Coke pig iron was hardly used to produce wrought iron until 1755, when Darby's son Abraham Darby II built furnaces at Horsehay and Ketley where low sulfur coal was available, and not far from Coalbrookdale.
These furnaces were equipped with water-powered bellows, the water being pumped by Newcomen atmospheric engines.
Abraham Darby III installed similar steam-pumped, water-powered blowing cylinders at the Dale Company when he took control in 1768.
The Dale Company used Newcomen engines to drain its mines and made parts for engines which it sold throughout the country.
Steam engines made the use of higher-pressure and volume blast practical; however, the leather used in bellows was expensive to replace.
In 1757, ironmaster John Wilkinson patented a hydraulic powered blowing engine for blast furnaces.
The blowing cylinder for blast furnaces was introduced in 1760 and the first blowing cylinder made of cast iron is believed to be the one used at Carrington in 1768, designed by John Smeaton.
Cast iron cylinders for use with a piston were difficult to manufacture.
James Watt had difficulty trying to have a cylinder made for his first steam engine.
In 1774 Wilkinson invented a machine for boring cylinders.
After Wilkinson bored the first successful cylinder for a Boulton and Watt steam engine in 1776, he was given an exclusive contract for providing cylinders.
Watt developed a rotary steam engine in 1782, they were widely applied to blowing, hammering, rolling and slitting.
In addition to lower cost and greater availability, coke had other advantages over charcoal in that it was harder and made the column of materials flowing down the blast furnace more porous and did not crush in the much taller furnaces of the late 19th century.
As cast iron became cheaper and widely available, it began being a structural material for bridges and buildings.
A famous early example is The Iron Bridge built in 1778 with cast iron produced by Abraham Darby III.
However, most cast iron was converted to wrought iron.
Conversion of cast iron had long been done in a finery forge.
An improved refining process known as potting and stamping was developed, but this was superseded by Henry Cort's puddling process.
Cort developed significant iron manufacturing processes: rolling in 1783 and puddling in 1784.
Puddling produced a structural grade iron at a relatively low cost.
Puddling was backbreaking and extremely hot work.
Few puddlers lived to be 40.
Puddling became widely used after 1800.
British iron manufacturers had used considerable amounts of iron imported from Sweden and Russia to supplement domestic supplies.
Because of the increased British production, by the 1790s Britain eliminated imports and became a net exporter of bar iron.
Hot blast, patented by the Scottish inventor James Beaumont Neilson in 1828, was the most important development of the 19th century for saving energy in making pig iron.
The amount of fuel to make a unit of pig iron was reduced at first by between one-third using coke or two-thirds using coal; the efficiency gains continued as the technology improved.
Hot blast raised the operating temperature of furnaces, increasing their capacity.
Using less coal or coke meant introducing fewer impurities into the pig iron.
This meant that lower quality coal could be used in areas where coking coal was unavailable or too expensive; however, by the end of the 19th century transportation costs fell considerably.
Shortly before the Industrial Revolution, an improvement was made in the production of steel, which was an expensive commodity and used only where iron would not do, such as for cutting edge tools and springs.
Benjamin Huntsman developed his crucible steel technique in the 1740s.
The supply of cheaper iron and steel aided a number of industries, such as those making nails, hinges, wire, and other hardware items.
The development of machine tools allowed better working of iron, causing it to be increasingly used in the rapidly growing machinery and engine industries.
Smelting of copper in reverberatory furnaces using coal was pioneered in Bristol in the 1680s.
Swansea in Britain developed in the 19th century into the World's prime hub of copper smelting importing ore from places like Chile, Cuba and Australia.
Reverberatory furnaces were introduced to Chile around 1830 by Charles Saint Lambert.
This revolutionized Chilean copper mining to such degree that the country came to supply 19% of the copper produced worldwide in the 19th century.
The use of mineral coal instead charcoal in reverberatory furnances introduced by Saint Lambert also meant a decrease in the dependency on the scarce firewood to be found on Atacama Desert and its surrounding semi-arid areas as was the case with earlier smelting technology.
The development of the stationary steam engine was important in the Industrial Revolution; however, during its early period, most industrial power was supplied by water and wind.
In Britain, by 1800 an estimated 10,000 horsepower was being supplied by steam.
By 1815 steam power had grown to 210,000 hp.
The first commercially successful industrial use of steam power was patented by Thomas Savery in 1698.
He constructed in London a low-lift combined vacuum and pressure water pump that generated about one horsepower (hp) and was used in waterworks and a few mines.
The first successful piston steam engine was introduced by Thomas Newcomen before 1712.
Newcomen engines were installed for draining hitherto unworkable deep mines, with the engine on the surface; these were large machines, requiring a significant amount of capital, and produced upwards of 3.
They were extremely inefficient by modern standards, but when located where coal was cheap at pit heads, they opened up a great expansion in coal mining by allowing mines to go deeper.
The engines spread to Hungary in 1722, then Germany and Sweden; 110 were built by 1733.
In the 1770s John Smeaton built large examples and introduced improvements.
Despite their disadvantages, Newcomen engines were reliable and easy to maintain and continued to be used in coalfields until the early 19th century.
A fundamental change in working principles was brought about by James Watt, a Scotsman.
With financial support from his business partner, the Englishman Matthew Boulton, he had succeeded by 1778 in perfecting his steam engine, which incorporated radical improvements, notably closing the upper part of the cylinder making the low-pressure steam drive the top of the piston instead of the atmosphere and the celebrated separate steam condenser chamber.
The separate condenser did away with the cooling water that had been injected directly into the cylinder, which cooled the cylinder and wasted steam.
These improvements increased engine efficiency so Boulton and Watt's engines used only 20–25% as much coal per horsepower-hour as Newcomen's.
Boulton and Watt opened the Soho Foundry for the manufacture of such engines in 1795.
In 1783, the Watt steam engine had been fully developed into a double-acting rotative type, which meant it could be used to directly drive the rotary machinery of a factory or mill.
Both of Watt's basic engine types were commercially successful, and by 1800 the firm Boulton and Watt had constructed 496 engines, with 164 driving reciprocating pumps, 24 serving blast furnaces, and 308 powering mill machinery; most of the engines generated from 3.
Until about 1800, the most common pattern of steam engine was the beam engine, built as an integral part of a stone or brick engine-house, but soon self-contained rotative engines were developed, such as the table engine.
Around the start of the 19th century, at which time the Boulton and Watt patent expired, the Cornish engineer Richard Trevithick and the American Oliver Evans began to construct higher-pressure non-condensing steam engines, exhausting against the atmosphere.
Watt himself had refrained from building any such engine for fear of its dangers, holding back the development of self-propelled machines.
High pressure yielded an engine and boiler compact enough to be used on mobile road and rail locomotives and steamboats.
Small industrial power requirements continued to be provided by animal and human muscle until widespread electrification in the 20th century.
These included crank-powered, treadle-powered, and horse-powered machinery in workshops and small plants.
Over time it was shown that wooden components had the disadvantage of changing dimensions with temperature and humidity, and the joints tended to work loose.
As the Industrial Revolution progressed machines with metal parts and frames, making them more common.
Other uses of metal parts were in firearms and threaded fasteners, such as machine screws, bolts, and nuts.
There was need for precision in making parts, to allow better working machinery, interchangeability of parts, and standardization of threaded fasteners.
The demand for metal parts led to the development of several machine tools.
They have their origins in the tools developed in the 18th century by clock and scientific instrument makers, to enable them to batch-produce small mechanisms.
Before machine tools, metal was worked manually using the basic hand tools: hammers, files, scrapers, saws, and chisels.
Consequently, use of metal machine parts was kept to a minimum.
Hand methods of production were laborious and costly, and precision was difficult to achieve.
The first large precision machine tool was the cylinder boring machine invented by John Wilkinson in 1774.
It was designed to bore the large cylinders on steam engines.
Wilkinson's machine was the first to use the principle of line-boring, where the tool is supported on both ends.
The planing machine, the milling machine and the shaping machine were developed.
Though the milling machine was invented at this time, it was not developed as a serious workshop tool until later.
James Fox and Matthew Murray were manufacturers of machine tools who found success in exports and developed the planer around the same time as Richard Roberts.
Henry Maudslay, who trained a school of machine tool makers, was a mechanic who had been employed at the Royal Arsenal, Woolwich.
He worked as an apprentice under Jan Verbruggen, who, in 1774, installed a horizontal boring machine which was the first industrial size lathe in the UK.
Maudslay was hired by Joseph Bramah for the production of high-security metal locks that required precision craftsmanship.
Bramah patented a lathe with similarities to the slide rest lathe, Maudslay perfected this lathe, which cut machine screws of different thread pitches.
Before its invention, screws could not be cut with precision.
The slide rest lathe was called one of history's most important inventions.
Although it was not Maudslay's idea, he was the first to build a functional lathe using innovations of the lead screw, slide rest, and change gears.
Maudslay set up a shop, and built the machinery for making ships' pulley blocks for the Royal Navy in the Portsmouth Block Mills.
These machines were all-metal and the first for mass production and making components with interchangeability.
The lessons Maudslay learned about the need for stability and precision he adapted to the development of machine tools, and he trained men to build on his work, such as Richard Roberts, Joseph Clement and Joseph Whitworth.
The techniques to make mass-produced metal parts of sufficient precision to be interchangeable is attributed to the U.
Department of War which perfected interchangeable parts for firearms.
In the half-century following the invention of the fundamental machine tools, the machine industry became the largest industrial sector of the U.
Large-scale production of chemicals was an important development.
The first of these was the production of sulphuric acid by the lead chamber process, invented by John Roebuck in 1746.
He was able to increase the scale of the manufacture by replacing expensive glass vessels with larger, cheaper chambers made of riveted sheets of lead.
Instead of a small amount, he was able to make around 50 kilograms (100 pounds) in each chamber, a tenfold increase.
The production of an alkali on a large scale became an important goal, and Nicolas Leblanc succeeded in 1791 in introducing a method for the production of sodium carbonate (soda ash).
The Leblanc process was a reaction of sulfuric acid with sodium chloride to give sodium sulfate and hydrochloric acid.
The sodium sulfate was heated with calcium carbonate and coal to give a mixture of sodium carbonate and calcium sulfide.
Adding water separated the soluble sodium carbonate from the calcium sulfide.
The process produced significant pollution, nonetheless, this synthetic soda ash proved economical compared to that from burning plants, and to potash (potassium carbonate) produced from hardwood ashes.
Soda ash and sulphuric acid were important because they enabled the introduction of other inventions, replacing small-scale operations with more cost-effective and controllable processes.
Sodium carbonate had uses in the glass, textile, soap, and paper industries.
Early uses for sulfuric acid included pickling (removing rust from) iron and steel, and for bleaching cloth.
The development of bleaching powder (calcium hypochlorite) by chemist Charles Tennant in 1800, based on the discoveries of Claude Louis Berthollet, revolutionised the bleaching processes in the textile industry by reducing the time required for the traditional process then in use: repeated exposure to the sun in fields after soaking the textiles with alkali or sour milk.
Tennant's St Rollox Chemical Works, Glasgow, became the world's largest chemical plant.
After 1860 the focus on chemical innovation was in dyestuffs, and Germany took leadership, building a strong chemical industry.
Aspiring chemists flocked to German universities in 1860–1914 to learn the latest techniques.
British scientists lacked research universities and did not train advanced students; instead, the practice was to hire German-trained chemists.
In 1824 Joseph Aspdin, a British bricklayer turned builder, patented a chemical process for making portland cement, an important advance in the building trades.
This process involves sintering clay and limestone to about 1,400 °C (2,552 °F), then grinding it into a fine powder which is mixed with water, sand and gravel to produce concrete.
In the 1840s, Joseph's son William Aspdin developed his father's invention.
Portland cement concrete was used by English engineer Marc Isambard Brunel when constructing the Thames Tunnel, the world's first underwater tunnel.
Portland cement concrete was used on a large scale in the construction of the London sewer system a generation later.
Though others made a similar innovation, the large-scale introduction of gas lighting was the work of William Murdoch, an employee of Boulton & Watt.
The process consisted of the large-scale gasification of coal in furnaces, purification of the gas, and its storage and distribution.
The first gas lighting utilities were established in London between 1812 and 1820.
They became one of the major consumers of coal in the UK.
Gas lighting affected social and industrial organisation because it allowed factories and stores to remain open longer.
Its introduction allowed nightlife to flourish in cities and towns as interiors and streets could be lighted on a larger scale than before.
Glass was made in ancient Greece and Rome.
A new method of glass production, known as the cylinder process, was developed in Europe during the 19th century.
In 1832 this process was used by the Chance Brothers to create sheet glass; they became the leading producers of window and plate glass.
This advancement allowed for larger panes of glass to be created without interruption, thus freeing up the space planning in interiors as well as the fenestration of buildings.
The Crystal Palace is a significant example of the use of sheet glass in a new and innovative structure.
A machine for making a continuous sheet of paper, on a loop of wire fabric, was patented in 1798 by Louis-Nicolas Robert in France.
The paper machine is known as a Fourdrinier after the financiers, brothers Sealy and Henry Fourdrinier, who were stationers in London.
The Fourdrinier machine is the predominant means of production today.
The method of continuous production demonstrated by the paper machine influenced the development of continuous rolling of iron, steel and other continuous production processes.
The British Agricultural Revolution raised crop yields and released labour for industrial employment, although per-capita food supply in much of Europe remained stagnant until the late 18th century.
Key innovations included Jethro Tull's early 18th-century mechanical seed drill (1701), which ensured more even sowing and depth control, Joseph Foljambe's iron Rotherham plough (c.
Hand threshing with a flail, was a laborious job that had taken about one-quarter of agricultural labour, lower labour requirements resulted in lower wages and fewer labourers, who faced near starvation, leading to the 1830 Swing Riots.
Coal mining in Britain started early.
Before the steam engine, pits were often shallow bell pits following a seam of coal along the surface, which were abandoned as the coal was extracted.
If the geology was favourable, the coal was mined by means of an adit or drift mine driven into the side of a hill.
Shaft mining was done in some areas, but the limiting factor was the problem of removing water.
It could be done by hauling buckets up the shaft or to a sough (a tunnel driven into a hill to drain a mine).
The water had to be discharged into a stream or ditch at a level where it could flow away.
Introduction of the steam pump by Thomas Savery in 1698 and the Newcomen steam engine in 1712 facilitated removal of water and enabled deeper shafts, enabling more coal to be extracted.
These developments had begun before the Industrial Revolution, but the adoption of Smeaton's improvements to the Newcomen engine, followed by Watt's steam engines from the 1770s, reduced the fuel costs, making mines more profitable.
The Cornish engine, developed in the 1810s, was more efficient than the Watt engine.
Coal mining was dangerous owing to the presence of firedamp in coal seams.
A degree of safety was provided by the safety lamp invented in 1816 by Sir Humphry Davy, and independently by George Stephenson.
However, the lamps proved a false dawn because they became unsafe quickly and provided weak light.
Firedamp explosions continued, often setting off coal dust explosions, so casualties grew during the 19th century.
Conditions were very poor, with a high casualty rate from rock falls.
At the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, inland transport was by navigable rivers and roads, with coastal vessels employed to move heavy goods.
Wagonways were used for conveying coal to rivers for further shipment, but canals had not yet been widely constructed.
Animals supplied all motive power on land, with sails providing motive power on the sea.
The first horse railways were introduced toward the end of the 18th century, with steam locomotives introduced in the early 19th century.
Improving sailing technologies boosted speed by 50% between 1750 and 1830.
The Industrial Revolution improved Britain's transport infrastructure with turnpike road, waterway and rail networks.
Raw materials and finished products could be moved quicker and cheaper than before.
Improved transport allowed ideas to spread quickly.
Before and during the Industrial Revolution navigation on British rivers was improved by removing obstructions, straightening curves, widening and deepening, and building navigation locks.
Britain had over 1,600 kilometres (1,000 mi) of navigable rivers and streams by 1750.
Canals and waterways allowed bulk materials to be economically transported long distances inland.
This was because a horse could pull a barge with a tens of times larger than could be drawn in a cart.
Canals began to be built in the UK in the late 18th century to link major manufacturing centres.
Known for its huge commercial success, the Bridgewater Canal in North West England, was opened in 1761 and mostly funded by The 3rd Duke of Bridgewater.
From Worsley to the rapidly growing town of Manchester its construction cost £168,000 (£22,103,210 as of 2013), but its advantages over land and river transport meant that within one year, the coal price in Manchester fell by half.
This success inspired Canal Mania, canals were hastily built with the aim of replicating the commercial success of Bridgewater, the most notable being the Leeds and Liverpool Canal and the Thames and Severn Canal which opened in 1774 and 1789 respectively.
By the 1820s a national network was in existence.
Canal construction served as a model for the organisation and methods used to construct the railways.
They were largely superseded by the railways from the 1840s.
The last major canal built in the UK was the Manchester Ship Canal, which upon opening in 1894 was the world's largest ship canal, and opened Manchester as a port.
However, it never achieved the commercial success its sponsors hoped for and signalled canals as a dying transport mode in an age dominated by railways, which were quicker and often cheaper.
Britain's canal network, and its mill buildings, is one of the most enduring features of the Industrial Revolution to be seen in Britain.
France was known for having an excellent road system at this time; however, most roads on the European continent and in the UK were in bad condition, dangerously rutted.
Much of the original British road system was poorly maintained by local parishes, but from the 1720s turnpike trusts were set up to charge tolls and maintain some roads.
Increasing numbers of main roads were turnpiked from the 1750s: almost every main road in England and Wales was the responsibility of a turnpike trust.
New engineered roads were built by John Metcalf, Thomas Telford and John McAdam, with the first 'macadam' stretch of road being Marsh Road at Ashton Gate, Bristol in 1816.
The first macadam road in the U.
The major turnpikes radiated from London and were the means by which the Royal Mail was able to reach the rest of the country.
Heavy goods transport on these roads was by slow, broad-wheeled carts hauled by teams of horses.
Lighter goods were conveyed by smaller carts or teams of packhorse.
Stagecoaches carried the rich, and the less wealthy rode on carriers carts.
Productivity of road transport increased greatly during the Industrial Revolution, and the cost of travel fell dramatically.
Between 1690 and 1840 productivity tripled for long-distance carrying and increased four-fold in stage coaching.
Railways were made practical by the widespread introduction of inexpensive puddled iron after 1800, the rolling mill for making rails, and the development of the high-pressure steam engine.
Reduced friction was a major reason for the success of railways compared to wagons.
This was demonstrated on an iron plate-covered wooden tramway in 1805 at Croydon, England.
A good horse on an ordinary turnpike road can draw two thousand pounds, or one ton.
A party of gentlemen were invited to witness the experiment, that the superiority of the new road might be established by ocular demonstration.
Twelve wagons were loaded with stones, till each wagon weighed three tons, and the wagons were fastened together.
A horse was then attached, which drew the wagons with ease, six miles [10 km] in two hours, having stopped four times, in order to show he had the power of starting, as well as drawing his great load.
Wagonways for moving coal in the mining areas had started in the 17th century and were often associated with canal or river systems for the further movement.
These were horse-drawn or relied on gravity, with a stationary steam engine to haul the wagons back to the top of the incline.
The first applications of steam locomotive were on wagon or plate ways.
Horse-drawn public railways begin in the early 19th century when improvements to pig and wrought iron production lowered costs.
Steam locomotives began being built after the introduction of high-pressure steam engines, after the expiration of the Boulton and Watt patent in 1800.
High-pressure engines exhausted used steam to the atmosphere, doing away with the condenser and cooling water.
They were much lighter and smaller in size for a given horsepower than the stationary condensing engines.
A few of these early locomotives were used in mines.
Steam-hauled public railways began with the Stockton and Darlington Railway in 1825.
The rapid introduction of railways followed the 1829 Rainhill trials, which demonstrated Robert Stephenson's successful locomotive design and the 1828 development of hot blast, which dramatically reduced the fuel consumption of making iron and increased the capacity of the blast furnace.
On 15 September 1830, the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, the first inter-city railway in the world, was opened.
The railway was engineered by Joseph Locke and George Stephenson, linked the rapidly expanding industrial town of Manchester with the port of Liverpool.
The railway became highly successful, transporting passengers and freight.
The success of the inter-city railway, particularly in the transport of freight and commodities, led to Railway Mania.
Construction of major railways connecting the larger cities and towns began in the 1830s, but only gained momentum at the very end of the first Industrial Revolution.
After many of the workers had completed the railways, they did not return to the countryside but remained in the cities, providing additional workers for the factories.
The Industrial Revolution effectively asked the social question, demanding new ideas for managing large groups.
Visible poverty, growing population and materialistic wealth, caused tensions between the richest and poorest.
These tensions were sometimes violently released and led to philosophical ideas such as socialism, communism and anarchism.
Prior to the Industrial Revolution, most were employed in agriculture as self-employed farmers, tenants, landless agricultural labourers.
It was common for families to spin yarn, weave cloth and make their clothing.
Households also spun and wove for market production.
At the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, India, China, and regions of Iraq and elsewhere in Asia and the Middle East produced most of the world's cotton cloth, while Europeans produced wool and linen goods.
In Great Britain in the 16th century, the putting-out system was practised, by which farmers and townspeople produced goods for a market in their homes, often described as cottage industry.
Merchant capitalists typically provided the raw materials, paid workers by the piece, and were responsible for sales.
Embezzlement of supplies by workers and poor quality were common.
The logistical effort in procuring and distributing raw materials and picking up finished goods were also limitations.
Some early spinning and weaving machinery, such as a 40 spindle jenny for about six pounds in 1792, was affordable for cottagers.
Later machinery such as spinning frames, spinning mules and power looms were expensive, giving rise to capitalist ownership of factories.
Most textile factory workers during the Industrial Revolution were unmarried women and children, including many orphans.
They worked for 12–14 hours with only Sundays off.
It was common for women to take factory jobs seasonally during slack periods of farm work.
Lack of adequate transportation, long hours, and poor pay made it difficult to recruit and retain workers.
The change in the social relationship of the factory worker compared to farmers and cottagers was viewed unfavourably by Karl Marx; however, he recognized the increase in productivity from technology.
Some economists, such as Robert Lucas Jr.
Nothing remotely like this economic behaviour is mentioned by the classical economists, even as a theoretical possibility.
Others argue that while growth of the economy was unprecedented, living standards for most did not grow meaningfully until the late 19th century and workers' living standards declined under early capitalism.
Some studies estimate that wages in Britain only increased 15% between the 1780s and 1850s and life expectancy did not dramatically increase until the 1870s.
Average height declined during the Industrial Revolution, because nutrition was decreasing.
Life expectancy of children increased dramatically: the percentage of Londoners who died before the age of five decreased from 75% in 1730–49, to 32% in 1810–29.
The effects on living conditions have been controversial and were debated by historians from the 1950s to the 1980s.
Between 1813 and 1913, there was a significant increase in wages.
Chronic hunger and malnutrition were the norms for most, including in Britain and France, until the late 19th century.
Until about 1750, malnutrition limited life expectancy in France to 35, and 40 in Britain.
The US population was adequately fed, taller, and had a life expectancy of 45–50, though this slightly declined by the mid 19th century.
Food consumption per person also declined during an episode known as the Antebellum Puzzle.
Food supply in Great Britain was adversely affected by the Corn Laws (1815–46) which imposed tariffs on imported grain.
The laws were enacted to keep prices high to benefit domestic producers.
The Corn Laws were repealed in the early years of the Great Irish Famine.
The initial technologies of the Industrial Revolution, such as mechanized textiles, iron and coal, did little, if anything, to lower food prices.
In Britain and the Netherlands, food supply increased before the Industrial Revolution with better agricultural practices; however, population grew as well.
Rapid population growth included the new industrial and manufacturing cities, as well as service centers such as Edinburgh and London.
The critical factor was financing, which was handled by building societies that dealt directly with large contracting firms.
Private renting from housing landlords was the dominant tenure, this was usually of advantage to tenants.
People moved in so rapidly there was not enough capital to build adequate housing, so low-income newcomers squeezed into overcrowded slums.
Clean water, sanitation, and public health facilities were inadequate; the death rate was high, especially infant mortality, and tuberculosis among young adults.
Cholera from polluted water and typhoid were endemic.
Unlike rural areas, there were no famines such that which devastated Ireland in the 1840s.
A large exposé literature grew up condemning the unhealthy conditions.
The most famous publication was by a founder of the socialist movement.
In The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844, Friedrich Engels describes backstreets of Manchester and other mill towns, where people lived in shanties and shacks, some not enclosed, some with dirt floors.
These shanty towns had narrow walkways between irregularly shaped lots and dwellings.
There were no sanitary facilities.
Population density was extremely high.
However, not everyone lived in such poor conditions.
The Industrial Revolution created a middle class of businessmen, clerks, foremen, and engineers who lived in much better conditions.
Conditions improved over the 19th century with new public health acts regulating things such as sewage, hygiene, and home construction.
In the introduction of his 1892 edition, Engels noted most of the conditions had greatly improved.
For example, the Public Health Act 1875 led to the more sanitary byelaw terraced house.
Pre-industrial water supply relied on gravity systems, pumping water was done by water wheels, and wipes were made of wood.
Steam-powered pumps and iron pipes allowed widespread piping of water to horse watering troughs and households.
Engels' book describes how untreated sewage created awful odours and turned the rivers green in industrial cities.
In 1854 John Snow traced a cholera outbreak in Soho, London to fecal contamination of a public water well by a home cesspit.
Snow's finding that cholera could be spread by contaminated water took years to be accepted, but led to fundamental changes in the design of public water and waste systems.
In 1855 the chemist Michael Faraday wrote a letter to The Times on the subject of the foul condition of the River Thames (raw sewerage went directly into the Thames), and in response to the exacerbation of sanitary conditions brought on by heavy industrialisation and urbanisation (London's population more than doubled between 1800 and 1850, making it by far the largest in the world), the modern sewage system was built in London by the Metropolitan Board of Works led by its chief engineer Joseph Bazalgette.
The London sewer system began construction in 1859 and included 82 miles (132 km) of main and 1,100 miles (1,800 km) of street sewers that diverted waste to the Thames Estuary, and by the 1890s it would feature the revolutionary biological treatment of sewage to oxidise the waste.
In the 18th century, there was relatively high literacy among farmers in England and Scotland.
This permitted the recruitment of literate craftsmen, skilled workers, foremen, and managers who supervised textile factories and coal mines.
Much of the labour was unskilled, and especially in textile mills children as young as eight proved useful in handling chores and adding to family income.
Children were taken out of school to work alongside their parents in the factories.
However, by the mid-19th century, unskilled labour forces were common in Western Europe, and British industry moved upscale, needing more engineers and skilled workers who could handle technical instructions and handle complex situations.
Literacy was essential to be hired.
Upon the speedy provision of elementary education depends are industrial prosperity.
It is of no use trying to give technical teaching to our citizens without elementary education; uneducated labourers—and many of our labourers are utterly uneducated—are, for the most part, unskilled labourers, and if we leave our work–folk any longer unskilled, notwithstanding their strong sinews and determined energy, they will become overmatched in the competition of the world.
The invention of the paper machine and the application of steam power to the industrial processes of printing supported a massive expansion of newspaper and pamphlet publishing, which contributed to rising literacy and demands for mass political participation.
Consumers benefited from falling prices for clothing and household articles such as cast iron cooking utensils, and in the following decades, stoves for cooking and space heating.
Coffee, tea, sugar, tobacco, and chocolate became affordable to many in Europe.
The consumer revolution in England from the 17th to the mid-18th century had seen a marked increase in the consumption and variety of luxury goods and products by individuals from different economic and social backgrounds.
With improvements in transport and manufacturing technology, opportunities for buying and selling became faster and more efficient.
The expanding textile trade in the north of England meant the three-piece suit became affordable to the masses.
Founded by potter and retail entrepreneur Josiah Wedgwood in 1759, Wedgwood fine china and porcelain tableware was became a common feature on dining tables.
Rising prosperity and social mobility in the 18th century increased those with disposable income for consumption, and the marketing of goods for individuals, as opposed households, started to appear.
With the rapid growth of towns and cities, shopping became an important part of everyday life.
Window shopping and the purchase of goods became a cultural activity.
Prosperity and expansion in manufacturing industries such as pottery and metalware increased consumer choice dramatically.
Where once labourers ate from metal platters with wooden implements, ordinary workers now dined on Wedgwood porcelain.
Consumers came to demand an array of new household goods and furnishings: metal knives and forks.
The age of mass consumption had arrived.
New businesses appeared in towns and cities throughout Britain.
Confectionery was one such industry that saw rapid expansion.
According to food historian Polly Russell: "chocolate and biscuits became products for the masses.
By the mid-19th century, sweet biscuits were an affordable indulgence and business was booming.
In 1847 Fry's of Bristol produced the first chocolate bar.
Their competitor Cadbury, of Birmingham, was the first to commercialize the association between confectionery and romance when they produced a heart-shaped box of chocolates for Valentine's Day in 1868.
The department store became a common feature in major High Streets; one of the first was opened in 1796 by Harding, Howell & Co.
The oldest toy store, Hamleys, opened in London in 1760.
In the 1860s, fish and chip shops first appeared to satisfy the needs of the growing industrial population.
Street sellers also became common in an increasingly urbanized country.
Matthew White: "Crowds swarmed in every thoroughfare.
Scores of street sellers 'cried' merchandise from place to place, advertising the wealth of goods and services on offer.
Milkmaids, orange sellers, fishwives and piemen.
A soft drinks company, R.
White's Lemonade, began in 1845 by selling drinks in London in a wheelbarrow.
Increased literacy, industrialisation, and the railway created a market for cheap literature for the masses and the ability for it to be circulated on a large scale.
Penny dreadfuls were created in the 1830s to meet this demand, "Britain's first taste of mass-produced popular culture for the young", and "the Victorian equivalent of video games".
By the 1860s and 70s more than one million boys' periodicals were sold per week.
Labelled an "authorpreneur" by The Paris Review, Charles Dickens used the innovations of the era to sell books: new printing presses, enhanced advertising revenues, and the railways.
His first novel, The Pickwick Papers (1836), became a phenomenon, its unprecedented success sparking spin-offs and merchandise ranging from Pickwick cigars, playing cards, china figurines, Sam Weller puzzles, Weller boot polish and jokebooks.
Nicholas Dames in The Atlantic writes, "Literature" is not a big enough category for Pickwick.
It defined its own, a new one that we have learned to call "entertainment".
Urbanisation led to development of the music hall in the 1850s, with the newly created urban communities, cut off from their cultural roots, requiring new and accessible forms of entertainment.
In 1861, Welsh entrepreneur Pryce Pryce-Jones formed the first mail order business, an idea which changed retail.
Selling Welsh flannel, he created catalogues, with customers able to order by mail for the first time—this following the Uniform Penny Post in 1840 and invention of the postage stamp (Penny Black) with a charge of one penny for carriage between any two places in the UK irrespective of distance—and the goods were delivered via the new railway system.
As the railways expanded overseas, so did his business.
The Industrial Revolution was the first time there was a simultaneous increase in population and per person income.
The population of England and Wales, which had remained steady at six million in 1700–40, rose dramatically afterwards.
England's population doubled from 8.
Improved conditions led to the population of Britain increasing from 10 million to 30 million in the 19th century.
Europe's population increased from 100 million in 1700 to 400 million by 1900.
Between 1815 and 1939, 20% of Europe's population left home, pushed by poverty, a rapidly growing population, and the displacement of peasant farming and artisan manufacturing.
They were pulled abroad by the enormous demand for labour, ready availability of land, and cheap transportation.
Many did not find a satisfactory life, leading 7 million to return to Europe.
This mass migration had large demographic effects: in 1800, less than 1% of the world population consisted of overseas Europeans and their descendants; by 1930, they represented 11%.
The Americas felt the brunt of this huge emigration, largely concentrated in the US.
The growth of the industry since the late 18th century led to massive urbanisation and the rise of new great cities, first in Europe, then elsewhere, as new opportunities brought huge numbers of migrants from rural communities into urban areas.
In 1800, only 3% of humans lived in cities, compared to 50% by 2000.
Manchester had a population of 10,000 in 1717, by 1911 it had burgeoned to 2.
Women's historians have debated the effect of the Industrial Revolution and capitalism on the status of women.
Taking a pessimistic view, Alice Clark argues that when capitalism arrived in 17th-century England, it lowered the status of women as they lost much of their economic importance.
Clark argues that in 16th-century England, women were engaged in many aspects of industry and agriculture.
The home was a central unit of production, and women played a vital role in running farms and some trades and landed estates.
Their economic role gave them a sort of equality.
However, Clark argues, as capitalism expanded, there was more division of labour with husbands taking paid labour jobs outside the home, and wives reduced to unpaid household work.
Middle- and upper-class women were confined to an idle domestic existence, supervising servants; lower-class women were forced to take poorly paid jobs.
Capitalism, therefore, had a negative effect on powerful women.
In a more positive interpretation, Ivy Pinchbeck argues capitalism created the conditions for women's emancipation.
Tilly and Scott have emphasised the continuity in the status of women, finding three stages in English history.
In the pre-industrial era, production was mostly for home use, and women produced much of the needs of the households.
The second stage was the "family wage economy" of early industrialisation; the entire family depended on the collective wages of its members, including husband, wife, and older children.
The third, or modern, stage is the "family consumer economy", in which the family is the site of consumption, and women are employed in large numbers in retail and clerical jobs to support rising consumption.
Ideas of thrift and hard work characterised middle-class families as the Industrial Revolution swept Europe.
These values were displayed in Samuel Smiles' book Self-Help, in which he states that the misery of the poorer classes was "voluntary and self-imposed—the results of idleness, thriftlessness, intemperance, and misconduct.
Harsh working conditions were prevalent long before the Industrial Revolution.
Pre-industrial society was very static and often cruel—child labour, dirty living conditions, and long working hours were just as prevalent before the Industrial Revolution.
The Industrial Revolution witnessed the triumph of a middle class of industrialists and businessmen over a landed class of nobility and gentry.
Working people found increased opportunities for employment in mills and factories, but these were under strict working conditions with long hours dominated by a pace set by machines.
As late as 1900, most US industrial workers worked 10-hour days, yet earned 20–40% less than that necessary for a decent life.
Most workers in textiles, which was the leading industry in terms of employment, were women and children.
For workers, industrial life "was a stony desert, which they had to make habitable by their own efforts.
Industrialisation led to the creation of the factory.
The factory system contributed to the growth of urban areas as workers migrated into the cities in search of work in the factories.
This was clearly illustrated in the mills and associated industries of Manchester, nicknamed "Cottonopolis", and the world's first industrial city.
Manchester experienced a six-times increase in population between 1771 and 1831.
Bradford grew by 50% every ten years between 1811 and 1851, and by 1851 only 50% of its population were born there.
For much of the 19th century, production was done in small mills which were typically water-powered and built to serve local needs.
Later, each factory would have its own steam engine and a chimney to give an efficient draft through its boiler.
Some industrialists tried to improve factory and living conditions for their workers.
One early reformer was Robert Owen, known for his pioneering efforts in improving conditions for at the New Lanark mills and often regarded as a key thinker of the early socialist movement.
By 1746 an integrated brass mill was working at Warmley near Bristol.
Raw material was smelted into brass and turned into pans, pins, wire, and other goods.
Housing was provided for workers on site.
Josiah Wedgwood and Matthew Boulton were other prominent early industrialists who employed the factory system.
The chances of surviving childhood did not improve throughout the Industrial Revolution, although infant mortality rates were reduced markedly.
There was still limited opportunity for education, and children were expected to work.
Child labour had existed before, but with the increase in population and education it became more visible.
Many children were forced to work in bad conditions for much lower pay than their elders, 10–20% of an adult male's wage, even though their productivity was comparable; there was no need for strength to operate an industrial machine, and since the industrial system was new, there were no experienced adult labourers.
This made child labour the labour of choice for manufacturing in the early phases of the Industrial Revolution, between the 18th and 19th centuries.
In England and Scotland in 1788, two-thirds of the workers in 143 water-powered cotton mills were children.
Reports detailing some of the abuses, particularly in the mines and textile factories, helped to popularise the children's plight.
The outcry, especially among the upper and middle classes, helped stir change for the young workers' welfare.
Politicians and the government tried to limit child labour by law, but factory owners resisted; some felt they were aiding the poor by giving their children money to buy food, others simply welcomed the cheap labour.
In 1833 and 1844, the first general laws against child labour, the Factory Acts, were passed in Britain: children younger than nine were not allowed to work, children were not permitted to work at night, and the working day for those under 18 was limited to 12 hours.
Factory inspectors enforced the law; however, their scarcity made this difficult.
A decade later, the employment of children and women in mining was forbidden.
Although laws decreased child labourers, it remained significantly present in Europe and the US until the 20th century.
The Industrial Revolution concentrated labour into mills, factories, and mines, thus facilitating the organisation of combinations or trade unions advance the interests of working people.
A union could demand better terms by withdrawing and halting production.
Employers had to decide between giving in at a cost, or suffering the cost of the lost production.
Skilled workers were difficult to replace, and these were the first to successfully advance their conditions through this kind of bargaining.
The main method unions used, and still use, to effect change was strike action.
Many strikes were painful events for both unions and management.
In Britain, the Combination Act 1799 forbade workers to form any kind of trade union until its repeal in 1824.
Even after this, unions were severely restricted.
A British newspaper in 1834 described unions as "the most dangerous institutions that were ever permitted to take root, under shelter of law, in any country.
The Reform Act 1832 extended the vote in Britain, but did not grant universal suffrage.
Six men from Tolpuddle in Dorset founded the Friendly Society of Agricultural Labourers to protest against the lowering of wages in the 1830s.
They refused to work for less than ten shillings per week, by this time wages had been reduced to seven shillings and were to be reduced to six.
In 1834 James Frampton, a local landowner, wrote to Prime Minister Lord Melbourne to complain about the union, invoking an obscure law from 1797 prohibiting people from swearing oaths to each other, which the members of the Society had done.
Six men were arrested, found guilty, and transported to Australia.
They became known as the Tolpuddle Martyrs.
In the 1830s and 40s, the chartist movement was the first large-scale organised working-class political movement that campaigned for political equality and social justice.
Its Charter of reforms received three million signatures, but was rejected by Parliament without consideration.
Working people formed friendly societies and cooperative societies as mutual support groups against times of economic hardship.
Enlightened industrialists, such as Robert Owen supported these organisations to improve conditions.
Unions slowly overcame the legal restrictions on the right to strike.
In 1842, a general strike involving cotton workers and colliers was organised through the chartist movement which stopped production across Britain.
Eventually, effective political organisation for working people was achieved through trades unions who, after the extensions of the franchise in 1867 and 1885, began to support socialist parties that merged to become the British Labour Party.
The rapid industrialisation of the English economy cost many craft workers their jobs.
The Luddite movement started first with lace and hosiery workers near Nottingham, and spread to other areas of the textile industry.
Many weavers found themselves suddenly unemployed as they could no longer compete with machines which required less skilled labour to produce more cloth than one weaver.
Many unemployed workers and others turned their animosity towards the machines that had taken their jobs and began destroying factories and machinery.
These attackers became known as Luddites, supposedly followers of Ned Ludd, a folklore figure.
The first attacks of the movement began in 1811.
The Luddites rapidly gained popularity, and the Government took drastic measures using the militia or army to protect industry.
Rioters who were caught were tried and hanged, or transported for life.
Unrest continued in other sectors as they industrialised, such as with agricultural labourers in the 1830s when large parts of southern Britain were affected by the Captain Swing disturbances.
Threshing machines were a particular target, and hayrick burning was a popular activity.
The riots led to the first formation of trade unions and further pressure for reform.
The traditional centres of hand textile production such as India, the Middle East, and China could not withstand competition from machine-made textiles, which destroyed the hand-made textile industries and left millions without work, many of whom starved.
The Industrial Revolution generated an enormous and unprecedented economic division in the world, as measured by the share of manufacturing output.
Cheap cotton textiles increased demand for raw cotton; previously, it had primarily been consumed in subtropical regions where it was grown, with little raw cotton available for export.
Consequently, prices of raw cotton rose.
British production grew from 2 million pounds in 1700 to 5 million in 1781 to 56 million in 1800.
The invention of the cotton gin by American Eli Whitney in 1792 was the decisive event.
It allowed green-seeded cotton to become profitable, leading to the widespread growth of slave plantations in the US, Brazil, and the West Indies.
In 1791, American cotton production was 2 million pounds, soaring to 35 million by 1800, half of which was exported.
America's cotton plantations were highly efficient, profitable and able to keep up with demand.
Civil War created a "cotton famine" that led to increased production in other areas of the world, including European colonies in Africa.
The origins of the environmental movement lay in the response to increasing levels of smoke pollution during the Industrial Revolution.
The emergence of great factories and the linked immense growth in coal consumption gave rise to an unprecedented level of air pollution in industrial centres; after 1900 the large volume of industrial chemical discharges added to the growing load of untreated human waste.
The first large-scale, modern environmental laws came in the form of Britain's Alkali Act 1863, to regulate the air pollution given off by the Leblanc process used to produce soda ash.
Alkali inspectors were appointed to curb this pollution.
The manufactured gas industry began in British cities in 1812–20.
This produced highly toxic effluent dumped into sewers and rivers.
The gas companies were repeatedly sued in nuisance lawsuits.
They usually lost and modified the worst practices.
The City of London indicted gas companies in the 1820s for polluting the Thames, poisoning its fish.
Parliament wrote company charters to regulate toxicity.
The industry reached the U.
In industrial cities local experts and reformers, especially after 1890, took the lead in identifying environmental degradation and pollution, and initiating grass-roots movements to achieve reforms.
Typically the highest priority went to water and air pollution.
The Coal Smoke Abatement Society was formed in Britain in 1898.
It was founded by artist William Blake Richmond, frustrated with the pall cast by coal smoke.
Although there were earlier pieces of legislation, the Public Health Act 1875 required all furnaces and fireplaces to consume their smoke.
It provided for sanctions against factories that emitted large amounts of black smoke.
The Industrial Revolution in continental Europe started in Belgium and France, then spread to German states by the middle of the 19th century.
In many industries, this involved the application of technology developed in Britain.
Typically, the technology was purchased from Britain, or British engineers and entrepreneurs moved abroad in search of opportunities.
By 1809, part of the Ruhr in Westphalia was called 'Miniature England' because of its similarities.
Most European governments provided state funding to the new industries.
In some cases, such as iron, the different availability of resources locally meant only some aspects of the British technology were adopted.
Belgium was the second country in which the Industrial Revolution took place.
Thanks to coal, Wallonia in south Belgium, took the lead.
Starting in the 1820s, and especially after Belgium became independent in 1830, factories comprising coke blast furnaces as well as puddling and rolling mills were built in the coal mining areas around Liège and Charleroi.
The leader was John Cockerill, a transplanted Englishman.
His factories at Seraing integrated all stages of production, from engineering to the supply of raw materials, as early as 1825.
Wallonia exemplified the radical evolution of industrial expansion, it was also the birthplace of a strong socialist party and trade unions.
With its Sillon industriel, "Especially in the Haine, Sambre and Meuse valleys.
Philippe Raxhon wrote about the period after 1830: "It was not propaganda but a reality the Walloon regions were becoming the second industrial power.
Though Belgium was the second industrial country after Britain, the effect of the Industrial Revolution was different.
The Industrial Revolution changed a mainly rural society into an urban one, but with a strong contrast between northern and southern Belgium.
During the Middle Ages and the early modern period, Flanders was characterised by the presence of large urban centres.
By comparison, this proportion reached only 17 percent in Wallonia, barely 10 percent in most West European countries, 16 percent in France, and 25 percent in Britain.
Also, in Wallonia, the traditional urban network was largely unaffected by the industrialisation process, even though the proportion of city-dwellers rose from 17 to 45 percent between 1831 and 1910.
Especially in the Haine, Sambre and Meuse valleys.
Nevertheless, industrialisation remained quite traditional in the sense that it did not lead to the growth of modern and large urban centres, but to a conurbation of industrial villages and towns developed around a coal mine or a factory.
Communication routes between these small centres only became populated later and created a much less dense urban morphology.
The Industrial Revolution in France did not correspond to the main model followed by other countries.
Most French historians argue France did not go through a clear take-off.
Instead, economic growth and industrialisation was slow and steady through the 18th and 19th centuries.
Germany's political disunity—with three dozen states—and a pervasive conservatism made it difficult to build railways in the 1830s.
However, by the 1840s, trunk lines linked the major cities; each German state was responsible for the lines within its borders.
Lacking a technological base at first, the Germans imported their engineering and hardware from Britain, but quickly learned the skills needed to operate and expand the railways.
In many cities, the new railway shops were the centres of technological awareness and training, so that by 1850, Germany was self-sufficient in meeting the demands of railway construction, and the railways were a major impetus for the growth of the new steel industry.
Observers found that even as late as 1890, their engineering was inferior to Britain's.
However, German unification in 1871 stimulated consolidation, nationalisation into state-owned companies, and further rapid growth.
Unlike in France, the goal was the support of industrialisation, and so heavy lines crisscrossed the Ruhr and other industrial districts and provided good connections to the major ports of Hamburg and Bremen.
By 1880, Germany had 9,400 locomotives pulling 43,000 passengers and 30,000 tons of freight, and pulled ahead of France.
Based on its leadership in chemical research in universities and industrial laboratories, Germany became dominant in the world's chemical industry in the late 19th century.
Between 1790-1815, Sweden experienced parallel economic movements: an agricultural revolution with larger agricultural estates, new crops, and farming tools and commercialisation of farming, and a proto industrialisation, with small industries established in the countryside and workers switching between agricultural work in the summer and industrial production in the winter.
This led to economic growth benefiting the population and leading to a consumption revolution in the 1820s.
Between 1815-50, the protoindustries developed into specialised and larger industries.
This period witnessed regional specialisation with mining in Bergslagen, textile mills in Sjuhäradsbygden, and forestry in Norrland.
Important institutional changes took place, such as the introduction of free and mandatory schooling in 1842 (first time in the world), abolition of the monopoly on trade in handicrafts in 1846, and a stock company law in 1848.
From 1850 to 1890, there was a rapid expansion in exports, dominated by crops, wood, and steel.
Sweden abolished most tariffs and other barriers to free trade in the 1850s and joined the gold standard in 1873.
Large infrastructural investments were made, mainly in the expanding railroad network, which was financed by the government and private enterprises.
From 1890 to 1930, new industries developed with their focus on the domestic market: mechanical engineering, power utilities, papermaking and textiles.
The Habsburg realms, which became Austria-Hungary in 1867, had a population of 23 million in 1800, growing to 36 million by 1870.
Between 1818-70, industrial growth averaged 3% annually, though development varied across regions.
A boost to industrialisation came with the construction of the rail network between 1850-73, which transformed transport by making it faster, more reliable and affordable.
Proto-industrialisation had begun by 1750 in Alpine and Bohemian regions—now the Czech Republic—which emerged as the industrial hub of the empire.
The textile industry led this transformation, adopting mechanisation, steam engines, and the factory system.
The first mechanical loom in the Czech lands was introduced in Varnsdorf in 1801 followed shortly by the arrival of steam engines in Bohemia and Moravia.
Textile production flourished in industrial centers such as Prague and Brno—the latter earning the nickname "Moravian Manchester.
The iron industry also expanded in the Alpine regions after 1750.
Hungary, by contrast, remained predominantly rural and under-industrialised until after 1870.
However, reformers like Count István Széchenyi played a crucial role in laying the groundwork for future development.
Often called "the greatest Hungarian," Széchenyi advocated for economic modernisation, infrastructure development, and industrial education.
His initiatives included the promotion of river regulation, bridge construction, and the founding of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences—all aimed at fostering a market-oriented economy.
In 1791, Prague hosted the first World's Fair, in Clementinum showcasing the region’s growing industrial sophistication.
An earlier industrial exhibition was held in conjunction with the coronation of Leopold II as King of Bohemia, celebrating advanced manufacturing techniques in the Czech lands.
From 1870 to 1913, technological innovation drove industrialisation and urbanisation across the empire.
Gross national product (GNP) per capita grew at an average annual rate of 1.
Nevertheless, Austria-Hungary as a whole continued to lag behind more industrialised powers like Britain and Germany, largely due to its later start in the modernisation process.
The Industrial Revolution began about 1870 as Meiji period leaders decided to catch up with the West.
The government built railways, improved roads, and inaugurated a land reform program to prepare the country for further development.
It inaugurated a new Western-based education system for young people, sent thousands of students to the US and Europe, and hired more than 3,000 Westerners to teach modern science, mathematics, technology, and foreign languages.
In 1871, a group of Japanese politicians known as the Iwakura Mission toured Europe and the US to learn Western ways.
The result was a deliberate state-led industrialisation policy to enable Japan to quickly catch up.
The Bank of Japan, founded in 1882, used taxes to fund model steel and textile factories.
Modern industry first appeared in textiles, including cotton and especially silk, which was based in home workshops in rural areas.
During the late 18th and early 19th centuries when Western Europe began to industrialise, the US was primarily an agricultural and natural resource producing and processing economy.
The building of roads and canals, the introduction of steamboats and the building of railroads were important for handling agricultural and natural resource products in the large and sparsely populated country.
Important American technological contributions were the cotton gin and the development of a system for making interchangeable parts, which was aided by the development of the milling machine in the US.
The development of machine tools and system of interchangeable parts was the basis for the rise of the US as the world's leading industrial nation in the late 19th century.
Oliver Evans invented an automated flour mill in the mid-1780s, that used control mechanisms and conveyors so no labour was needed from when grain was loaded into the elevator buckets, until the flour was discharged into a wagon.
This is considered to be the first modern materials handling system, an important advance in the progress toward mass production.
The US originally used horse-powered machinery for small-scale applications such as grain milling, but eventually switched to water power after textile factories began being built in the 1790s.
As a result, industrialisation was concentrated in New England and the Northeastern United States, which has fast-moving rivers.
The newer water-powered production lines proved more economical than horse-drawn production.
In the late 19th century steam-powered manufacturing overtook water-powered manufacturing, allowing the industry to spread to the Midwest.
Thomas Somers and the Cabot Brothers founded the Beverly Cotton Manufactory in 1787, the first cotton mill in America, the largest cotton mill of its era, and a significant milestone in the research and development of cotton mills.
This mill was designed to use horsepower, but the operators quickly learned that the horse-drawn platform was economically unstable, and had losses for years.
Despite this, the Manufactory served as a playground of innovation, both in turning a large amount of cotton, but also developing the water-powered milling structure used in Slater's Mill.
In 1793, Samuel Slater (1768–1835) founded the Slater Mill at Pawtucket, Rhode Island.
He had learned of the new textile technologies as a boy apprentice in Derbyshire, England, and defied laws against the emigration of skilled workers by leaving for New York in 1789, hoping to make money with his knowledge.
After founding Slater's Mill, he went on to own 13 textile mills.
Daniel Day established a wool carding mill in the Blackstone Valley at Uxbridge, Massachusetts in 1809, the third woollen mill established in the US.
The Blackstone Valley National Heritage Corridor retraces the history of "America's Hardest-Working River', Blackstone River, which, with its tributaries, cover more than 70 kilometres (45 mi).
At its peak over 1,100 mills operated in this valley, including Slater's Mill.
Merchant Francis Cabot Lowell from Newburyport, Massachusetts, memorised the design of textile machines on his tour of British factories in 1810.
The War of 1812 ruined his import business but realising demand for domestic-finished cloth was emerging in America, on his return he set up the Boston Manufacturing Company.
Lowell and his partners built America's second cotton-to-cloth textile mill at Waltham, Massachusetts, second to the Beverly Cotton Manufactory.
After his death in 1817, his associates built America's first planned factory town, which they named after him.
This enterprise was capitalised in a public stock offering, one of the first uses of it in the US.
Lowell, Massachusetts, using nine kilometres (5+1⁄2 miles) of canals and 7,500 kilowatts (10,000 horsepower) delivered by the Merrimack River.
The short-lived utopia-like Waltham-Lowell system was formed, as a direct response to the poor working conditions in Britain.
However, by 1850, especially following the Great Famine of Ireland, the system had been replaced by poor immigrant labour.
Precision metal machining techniques were developed by the U.
Department of War to make interchangeable parts for firearms.
Techniques included using fixtures to hold the parts in the proper position, jigs to guide the cutting tools and precision blocks and gauges to measure the accuracy.
The milling machine, a fundamental machine tool, is believed to have been invented by Eli Whitney, who was a government contractor who built firearms as part of this program.
Another important invention was the Blanchard lathe, invented by Thomas Blanchard.
The Blanchard lathe was actually a shaper that could produce copies of wooden gun stocks.
The use of machinery and the techniques for producing standardised and interchangeable parts became known as the American system of manufacturing.
Precision manufacturing techniques made it possible to build machines that mechanised the shoe and watch industries.
The industrialisation of the watch industry started in 1854 also in Waltham, Massachusetts, at the Waltham Watch Company, with the development of machine tools, gauges and assembling methods adapted to the micro precision required for watches.
The causes of the Industrial Revolution were complicated and remain debated.
Geographic factors include Britain's vast mineral resources.
In addition to metal ores, Britain had the highest quality coal reserves known at the time, as well as abundant water power, highly productive agriculture, numerous seaports and navigable waterways.
Some historians believe the Industrial Revolution was an outgrowth of social and institutional changes brought by the end of feudalism in Britain after the English Civil War in the 17th century, although feudalism began to break down after the Black Death of the mid 14th century.
The Enclosure movement and the British Agricultural Revolution made food production more efficient and less labour-intensive, forcing farmers no longer self-sufficient into cottage industry, for example weaving, and in the longer term into the cities and newly developed factories.
The colonial expansion of the 17th century with the accompanying development of international trade, creation of financial markets and accumulation of capital are cited as factors, as is the Scientific Revolution of the 17th century.
A change to getting married later made people able to accumulate more human capital during their youth, thereby encouraging economic development.
Until the 1980s, it was believed technological innovation was the heart of the Industrial Revolution and the key enabling technology was the invention of the steam engine.
Lewis Mumford has proposed that the Industrial Revolution had its origins in the Early Middle Ages, earlier than most estimates.
He explains that the model for standardised mass production was the printing press and that "the archetypal model for the industrial era was the clock".
He cites the monastic emphasis on order and time-keeping, and the fact medieval cities had at their centre a church with bell ringing at regular intervals, as necessary precursors to a synchronisation necessary for later manifestations such as the steam engine.
Anthropologist Joseph Henrich also argues for an origin in the Early Middle Ages but specifically identifies the primary cause as the dissolution of European kinship networks under pressure from the Catholic Church.
The presence of a large domestic market is considered an important driver of the Industrial Revolution, particularly explaining why it occurred in Britain.
In other nations, such as France, markets were split up by local regions, which often imposed tolls and tariffs on goods traded among them.
Internal tariffs were abolished by Henry VIII of England, they survived in Russia until 1753, 1789 in France and 1839 in Spain.
Governments' grant of limited monopolies to inventors under a developing patent system is considered an influential factor.
The effects of patents, on the development of industrialisation are clearly illustrated in the history of the steam engine.
In return for publicly revealing the workings of an invention, patents rewarded inventors such as James Watt by allowing them to monopolise production, and increasing the pace of technological development.
However, monopolies bring inefficiencies which counterbalance, or even overbalance, the benefits of publicising ingenuity and rewarding inventors.
Watt's monopoly prevented other inventors from introducing improved steam engines, thereby slowing the spread of steam power.
A question of active interest is why the Industrial Revolution occurred in Europe and not elsewhere, particularly China, India, and the Middle East (which pioneered in shipbuilding, textiles and water mills between 750-1100), or at other times like in Classical Antiquity or the Middle Ages.
One account argues Europeans have been characterized for millennia by a freedom-loving culture originating from the aristocratic societies of Indo-European invaders.
Many historians, however, have challenged this as being not only Eurocentric, but ignoring historical context.
In fact, before the Industrial Revolution, "there existed something of a global economic parity between the most advanced regions in the world economy.
China was the most technologically advanced country for centuries; however, it stagnated and was surpassed by Europe before the Age of Discovery, by which time China banned imports and denied entry to foreigners.
It taxed transported goods heavily.
Modern estimates of per capita income in Western Europe in the late 18th century are roughly 1,500 dollars in purchasing power parity whereas China had only 450 dollars.
India was feudal, politically fragmented and not as advanced as Western Europe.
Historians such as David Landes and sociologists Max Weber and Rodney Stark credit the different belief systems in Asia and Europe with dictating where the revolution occurred.
The religion and beliefs of Europe were products of Judeo-Christian and Greek thought.
Chinese society was founded on men like Confucius, Mencius, Han Feizi, and Buddha, resulting in different worldviews.
Other factors include the considerable distance of China's coal deposits from its cities, as well as the then unnavigable Yellow River that connects deposits to the sea.
Historian Joel Mokyr argued political fragmentation, the presence of many European states, made it possible for heterodox ideas to thrive, as entrepreneurs, innovators, ideologues and heretics could easily move to a neighboring state if one state suppressed their ideas and activities.
This is what set Europe apart from the technologically advanced, large unitary empires such as China, by providing "an insurance against economic and technological stagnation".
China had a printing press and movable type, and India had similar scientific and technological achievement as Europe in 1700, yet the Industrial Revolution occurred in Europe first.
In Europe, political fragmentation was coupled with an "integrated market for ideas" where Europe's intellectuals used the lingua franca of Latin, had a shared intellectual basis in Europe's classical heritage and the pan-European institution of the Republic of Letters.
Political institutions could contribute to the relation between democratization and economic growth during the Great Divergence.
Europe's monarchs desperately needed revenue, pushing them into alliances with their merchant classes.
Groups of merchants were granted monopolies and tax-collecting responsibilities in exchange for payments to the state.
Located in a region "at the hub of the largest and most varied network of exchange in history", Europe advanced as the leader of the Industrial Revolution.
In the Americas, Europeans found a windfall of silver, timber, fish, and maize, leading Peter Stearns to conclude that "Europe’s industrial revolution, which was to have such dramatic effects on the wider world, stemmed in great part from Europe’s changing position in the wider world, and a particular desire to catch up or surpass Asian manufacturing competitors.
Modern capitalism originated in the Italian city-states around the end of the first millennium.
The city-states were prosperous cities that were independent from feudal lords.
They were republics whose governments were composed of merchants, manufacturers, members of guilds, bankers and financiers.
The city-states built a network of branch banks in western European cities and introduced double entry bookkeeping.
Italian commerce was supported by schools that taught numeracy in financial calculations through abacus schools.
Britain provided the legal and cultural foundations that enabled entrepreneurs to pioneer the Industrial Revolution.
Britain had the highest quality coal in Europe and many sites for water power.
There were two main values that drove the Industrial Revolution in Britain: self-interest and entrepreneurial spirit.
Because of these, many advances were made that resulted in a huge increase in personal wealth and a consumer revolution.
These advancements benefitted British society as a whole.
Countries recognised the advancements and used them to begin their own revolutions.
A debate sparked by Eric Williams in his work Capitalism and Slavery (1944), concerned the role of slavery in financing the Industrial Revolution.
Williams argued European capital amassed from slavery was vital in the early years of the revolution.
This led to historiographical debate, with Seymour Drescher critiquing Williams' arguments in Econocide (1977).
The greater liberalisation of trade, from a large merchant base, may have allowed Britain to produce and use emerging scientific and technological developments more effectively than countries with stronger monarchies.
Britain emerged from the Napoleonic Wars as the only European nation not ravaged by financial plunder, and with the only significant merchant fleet.
Britain's extensive exporting cottage industries ensured markets were already available for early forms of manufactured goods.
Most British warfare was conducted overseas, reducing the devastating effects of territorial conquest that affected much of Europe.
This was further aided by Britain's geographical position—an island separated from the rest of Europe.
Britain was able to succeed due to the key resources it possessed, and population density.
Enclosure of common land and the related agricultural revolution made supply of labour readily available.
There was a local coincidence of natural resources in the North of England, the Midlands, South Wales and the Scottish Lowlands.
Local supplies of coal, iron, lead, copper, tin, limestone and water power resulted in excellent conditions for the development and expansion of industry.
Also, the damp, mild weather conditions of the North West of England provided ideal conditions for the spinning of cotton, providing a natural starting point for the birth of the textiles industry.
The stable political situation in Britain from 1688, following the Glorious Revolution, and society's greater receptiveness to change than other European countries, can be said to be factors favouring the Industrial Revolution.
Reinforcement of confidence in the rule of law, which followed establishment of the prototype of constitutional monarchy in 1688, and the emergence of a stable financial market based on the management of the national debt by the Bank of England, contributed to the capacity for private financial investment in industrial ventures.
Peasant resistance to industrialisation was eliminated by the Enclosure movement, and the landed classes developed commercial interests that made them pioneers in removing obstacles to capitalism.
Taking refuge in England in 1726, Voltaire wrote about commerce and religious diversity in Letters on the English (1733), noting why England was more prosperous compared to less religiously tolerant European neighbours: "Take a view of the Royal Exchange in London, a place more venerable than many courts of justice, where the representatives of all nations meet for the benefit of mankind.
There the Jew, the Mahometan [Muslim], and the Christian transact together, as though they all professed the same religion, and give the name of infidel to none but bankrupts.
There the Presbyterian confides in the Anabaptist, and the Churchman depends on the Quaker's word.
If one religion only were allowed in England, the Government would very possibly become arbitrary; if there were but two, the people would cut one another's throats; but as there are such a multitude, they all live happy and in peace.
Britain's population grew 280% from 1550 to 1820, while the rest of Western Europe grew 50–80%.
By 1800, only the Netherlands was more urbanised.
This was only possible because coal, coke, imported cotton, brick and slate had replaced wood, charcoal, flax, peat and thatch.
The latter compete with land grown to feed people while mined materials do not.
Yet more land would be freed when chemical fertilisers replaced manure and horse's work was mechanised.
In 1700, five-sixths of the coal mined worldwide was in Britain, while the Netherlands had none; so despite having Europe's best transport, lowest taxes, and most urbanised, well-paid, and literate population, it did not industrialise.
Without coal, Britain would have run out of suitable river sites for mills by the 1830s.
Based on science and experimentation from the continent, the steam engine was developed for pumping water out of mines, many of which in Britain had been mined to below the water table.
Although inefficient they were economical because they used unsaleable coal.
Iron rails were developed to transport coal, which was a major economic sector in Britain.
Bob Allen has argued that high wages, cheap capital and very cheap energy in Britain made it the ideal place for the industrial revolution.
These factors made it vastly more profitable to invest in research and development, and put technology to use than other societies.
However, 2018 studies in The Economic History Review showed wages were not particularly high in spinning or construction sectors, casting doubt on Allen's explanation.
A 2022 study found industrialization happened in areas with low wages and high mechanical skills, whereas literacy, banks and proximity to coal had little explanatory power.
Another theory is that the British advance was due to the presence of an entrepreneurial class which believed in progress, technology and hard work.
The existence of this class is often linked to the Protestant work ethic and particular status of Baptists and dissenting Protestant sects, such as the Quakers and Presbyterians.
English Dissenters were barred or discouraged from almost all public offices, as well as education at England's only two universities.
When the restoration of the monarchy took place in 1660 and membership in the official Church of England became mandatory due to the Test Act, they thereupon became active in banking, manufacturing and education.
The Unitarians were very involved in education, by running Dissenting Academies, where, in contrast to the universities of Oxford and Cambridge and schools such as Eton and Harrow, much attention was given to mathematics and the sciences, vital to the development of manufacturing technologies.
Historians sometimes consider this social factor to be important.
While members of these sects were excluded from certain circles of the government, they were considered fellow Protestants by many in the middle class, such as financiers or other businessmen.
Given this tolerance and the supply of capital, the natural outlet for more enterprising members of these sects was in new opportunities in the technologies created in the wake of the scientific revolution of the 17th century.
Knowledge of innovation was spread by several means.
Workers trained in a technique might move to another employer.
A common method was the study tour, in which individuals gathered information abroad.
Throughout the Industrial Revolution and preceding century, European countries and America engaged in such tours; Sweden and France trained civil servants and technicians to undertake them as policy, while in Britain and America manufacturers pursued tours independently.
Tour diaries are invaluable records of methods.
Translation of new technological knowledge into local vernacular has been credited with enabling the diffusion of technological knowledge.
Innovation spread via informal networks such as the Lunar Society of Birmingham, whose members met from 1765 to 1809 to discuss natural philosophy and its industrial applications.
They have been described as “the revolutionary committee of that most far-reaching of all the eighteenth-century revolutions, the Industrial Revolution.
Technical encyclopaedias disseminated methods.
John Harris’s Lexicon Technicum (1704) offered extensive scientific and engineering entries.
Abraham Rees’s The Cyclopaedia; or, Universal Dictionary of Arts, Sciences, and Literature (1802–19) contained detailed articles and engraved plates on machines and processes.
French works such as the Descriptions des Arts et Métiers and Diderot’s Encyclopédie similarly documented foreign techniques with engraved illustrations.
Periodicals on manufacturing and patents emerged in the 1790s; for instance, French journals like the Annales des Mines printed engineers’ travel reports on British factories, helping diffuse innovations.
The industrial revolution has been criticised for causing ecosystem collapse, mental illness, pollution and detrimental social systems.
It has also been criticised for valuing profits and corporate growth over life and wellbeing.
Multiple movements have arisen which reject aspects of the industrial revolution, such as the Amish or primitivists.
Some humanists and individualists criticise the Industrial Revolution for mistreating women and children and turning men into work machines that lacked autonomy.
Critics of the Industrial Revolution promoted a more interventionist state and formed new organisations to promote human rights.
Primitivism argues that the Industrial Revolution has created an unnatural frame of society and the world in which humans need to adapt to an unnatural urban landscape in which humans are perpetual cogs without personal autonomy.
Certain primitivists argue for a return to pre-industrial society, while others argue that technology such as modern medicine, and agriculture are all positive for humanity assuming they are controlled by and serve humanity and have no effect on the natural environment.
The Industrial Revolution has been criticised for leading to immense ecological and habitat destruction.
It has led to immense decrease in the biodiversity of life on Earth.
The Industrial revolution has been said to be inherently unsustainable and will lead to eventual collapse of society, mass hunger, starvation, and resource scarcity.
During the Industrial Revolution, an intellectual and artistic hostility towards the new industrialisation developed, associated with the Romantic movement.
Romanticism revered the traditionalism of rural life and recoiled against the upheavals caused by industrialisation, urbanisation and the wretchedness of the working classes.
Its major exponents in English included the artist and poet William Blake and poets William Wordsworth, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, John Keats, Lord Byron and Percy Bysshe Shelley.
The movement stressed the importance of "nature" in art and language, in contrast to "monstrous" machines and factories; the "Dark satanic mills" of Blake's poem "And did those feet in ancient time".
Mary Shelley's Frankenstein reflected concerns that scientific progress might be two-edged.
French Romanticism likewise was highly critical of industry.
Clark, Gregory (2007).
A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the World.
Princeton University Press.
ISBN 978-0-691-12135-2.
Haber, Ludwig Fritz (1958).
The Chemical Industry During the Nineteenth Century: A Study of the Economic Aspect of Applied Chemistry in Europe and North America.
A History of Industrial Power in the United States, 1730–1930, Vol.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
ISBN 978-0-262-08198-6.
Kindleberger, Charles Poor (1993).
A Financial History of Western Europe.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-507738-4.
An Encyclopedia of the History of Technology.
ISBN 978-0-415-14792-7.
Stories of Inventors and Discoverers in Science and the Useful Arts: A Book for Old and Young.
World War I, or the First World War (28 July 1914 – 11 November 1918), also known as the Great War, was a global conflict between two coalitions: the Allies (or Entente) and the Central Powers.
Major areas of conflict included Europe and the Middle East, as well as parts of Africa and the Asia-Pacific.
The war saw important developments in weaponry including tanks, aircraft, artillery, machine guns, and chemical weapons.
One of the deadliest conflicts in history, it resulted in an estimated 15 to 22 million military and civilian casualties and genocide.
The movement of large numbers of people was a major factor in the deadly Spanish flu pandemic.
The causes of World War I included the rise of the German Empire and decline of the Ottoman Empire, which disturbed the long-standing balance of power in Europe, the exacerbation of imperial rivalries, and an arms race between the great powers.
Growing tensions in the Balkans reached a breaking point on 28 June 1914 when Gavrilo Princip, a Bosnian Serb, assassinated Franz Ferdinand, the heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne.
Austria-Hungary blamed Serbia, and declared war on 28 July.
After Russia mobilised in Serbia's defence, Germany declared war on Russia and France, who had an alliance.
The United Kingdom entered the war after Germany invaded Belgium, and the Ottoman Empire joined the Central Powers in November.
Germany's strategy in 1914 was to quickly defeat France before transferring its forces to the east, but its advance was halted in September, and by the end of the year the Western Front consisted of a near-continuous line of trenches from the English Channel to Switzerland.
The Eastern Front was more dynamic, but neither side gained a decisive advantage, despite costly offensives.
Italy, Bulgaria, Romania, Greece, and others entered the war from 1915 onward.
Major battles, including those at Verdun, the Somme, and Passchendaele, failed to break the stalemate on the Western Front.
In April 1917, the United States joined the Allies after Germany resumed unrestricted submarine warfare against Atlantic shipping.
Later that year, the Bolsheviks seized power in Russia in the October Revolution; Soviet Russia signed an armistice with the Central Powers in December, followed by a separate peace in March 1918.
That month, Germany launched a spring offensive in the west, which despite initial successes left the German Army exhausted and demoralised.
The Allied Hundred Days Offensive, beginning in August 1918, caused a collapse of the German front line.
Following the Vardar Offensive, Bulgaria signed an armistice in late September.
By early November, the Allies had signed armistices with the Ottomans and with Austria-Hungary, leaving Germany isolated.
Facing a revolution at home, Kaiser Wilhelm II abdicated on 9 November, and the war ended with the Armistice of 11 November 1918.
The Paris Peace Conference of 1919–1920 imposed settlements on the defeated powers.
Under the Treaty of Versailles, Germany lost significant territories, was disarmed, and was required to pay large war reparations to the Allies.
The dissolution of the Russian, German, Austro-Hungarian, and Ottoman empires led to new national boundaries and the creation of new independent states including Poland, Finland, the Baltic states, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia.
The League of Nations was established to maintain world peace, but its failure to manage instability during the interwar period contributed to the outbreak of World War II in 1939.
Before World War II, the events of 1914–1918 were commonly referred to as the Great War or simply the World War.
In August 1914, The Independent stated of the conflict, "This is the Great War.
The earliest known use of the term First World War appeared in September 1914, when German biologist and philosopher Ernst Haeckel wrote that the ongoing "European War" would become "the first world war in the full sense of the word.
For much of the 19th century, the major European powers maintained a tenuous balance of power, known as the Concert of Europe.
After 1848, this was challenged by Britain's withdrawal into splendid isolation, the decline of the Ottoman Empire, New Imperialism, and the rise of Prussia under Otto von Bismarck.
Victory in the 1870–1871 Franco-Prussian War allowed Bismarck to consolidate a German Empire.
After 1871, French policy aimed to avenge this defeat and expand France's colonial empire.
In 1873, Bismarck negotiated the League of the Three Emperors, which included Austria-Hungary, Russia, and Germany.
After the 1877–1878 Russo-Turkish War, the League was dissolved due to Austrian concerns over the expansion of Russian influence in the Balkans, an area they considered to be of vital strategic interest.
Germany and Austria-Hungary then formed the 1879 Dual Alliance, which became the Triple Alliance when Italy joined in 1882.
For Bismarck, the purpose of these agreements was to isolate France by ensuring the three empires resolved any disputes among themselves.
In 1887, Bismarck set up the Reinsurance Treaty, a secret agreement between Germany and Russia to remain neutral if either were attacked by France or Austria-Hungary.
For Bismarck, peace with Russia was the foundation of German foreign policy, but in 1890, he was forced to retire by Wilhelm II.
The latter was persuaded not to renew the Reinsurance Treaty by his new Chancellor, Leo von Caprivi.
This gave France an opening to agree to the Franco-Russian Alliance in 1894, which was then followed by the 1904 Entente Cordiale with Britain.
The Triple Entente was completed by the 1907 Anglo-Russian Convention.
While not formal alliances, by settling longstanding colonial disputes in Asia and Africa, British support for France or Russia in any future conflict became a possibility.
This was accentuated by British and Russian support for France against Germany during the 1911 Agadir Crisis.
German economic and industrial strength continued to expand rapidly post-1871.
Backed by Wilhelm II, Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz sought to use this growth to build an Imperial German Navy that could compete with the British Royal Navy.
This policy was based on the work of US naval author Alfred Thayer Mahan, who argued that possession of a blue-water navy was vital for global power projection; Tirpitz had his books translated into German, while Wilhelm made them required reading for his advisors and senior military personnel.
Bismarck opposed any attempt to compete with the Royal Navy, since he believed Britain would not interfere in Europe as long as its maritime supremacy remained secure.
His dismissal in 1890 led to a change in policy and the start of an Anglo-German naval arms race.
Despite the vast sums spent by Tirpitz, the launch of HMS Dreadnought in 1906 made every existing battleship obsolete, and gave the British a technological advantage they never relinquished.
Ultimately, Germany invested huge resources on creating a navy large enough to antagonise Britain, but not defeat it.
In 1911, Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg acknowledged defeat, leading to the Rüstungswende or 'armaments turning point', when he switched expenditure from the navy to the army.
This decision was driven by German concerns over the speed of Russia's recovery from defeat in the Russo-Japanese War and the subsequent 1905 Russian Revolution.
Economic reforms led to a significant post-1908 expansion of railways and transportation infrastructure, particularly in its western border regions.
Since Germany and Austria-Hungary relied on faster mobilisation to compensate for their numerical inferiority compared to Russia, the threat posed by the closing of this gap was more important than competing with the Royal Navy.
After Germany expanded its standing army by 170,000 troops in 1913, France extended compulsory military service from two to three years, sparking similar measures from the Balkan powers, Italy, the Ottoman Empire and Austria-Hungary.
Absolute figures are difficult to calculate due to differences in categorising expenditure since they often omit civilian infrastructure projects like railways which had logistical importance and military use.
However, from 1908 to 1913, military spending by the six major European powers increased by over 50% in real terms.
The years before 1914 were marked by a series of crises in the Balkans, as other powers sought to benefit from the Ottoman decline.
While Pan-Slavic and Orthodox Russia considered itself the protector of Serbia and other Slav states, they preferred the strategically vital Bosporus straits to be controlled by a weak Ottoman government, rather than an ambitious Slav power like Bulgaria.
Russia had ambitions in northeastern Anatolia while its clients had overlapping claims in the Balkans.
These competing interests divided Russian policy-makers and added to regional instability.
Austrian statesmen viewed the Balkans as essential for the continued existence of their Empire and saw Serbian expansion as a direct threat.
The 1908–1909 Bosnian Crisis began when Austria annexed the former Ottoman territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which it had occupied since 1878.
Timed to coincide with the Bulgarian Declaration of Independence from the Ottoman Empire, this unilateral action was denounced by the European powers, but accepted as there was no consensus on how to resolve the situation.
Some historians see this as a significant escalation, ending any chance of Austria cooperating with Russia in the Balkans, while also damaging diplomatic relations between Serbia and Italy.
Tensions increased after the 1911–1912 Italo-Turkish War demonstrated Ottoman weakness and led to the formation of the Balkan League, an alliance of Serbia, Bulgaria, Montenegro, and Greece.
The League quickly overran most of the Ottomans' territory in the Balkans during the 1912–1913 First Balkan War, much to the surprise of outside observers.
The Serbian capture of ports on the Adriatic resulted in partial Austrian mobilisation, starting on 21 November 1912, including units along the Russian border in Galicia.
The Russian government decided not to mobilise in response, unprepared to precipitate a war.
The great powers sought to re-assert control through the 1913 Treaty of London, which had created an independent Albania while enlarging the territories of Bulgaria, Serbia, Montenegro and Greece.
However, disputes between the victors sparked the 33-day Second Balkan War, when Bulgaria attacked Serbia and Greece on 16 June 1913; it was defeated, losing most of Macedonia to Serbia and Greece, and Southern Dobruja to Romania.
The result was that even countries which benefited from the Balkan Wars, such as Serbia and Greece, felt cheated of their "rightful gains", while for Austria it demonstrated the apparent indifference with which other powers viewed their concerns, including Germany.
This complex mix of resentment, nationalism and insecurity helps explain why the pre-1914 Balkans became known as the "powder keg of Europe".
On 28 June 1914, Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria, heir presumptive to Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria, visited Sarajevo, the capital of the recently annexed Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Cvjetko Popović, Gavrilo Princip, Nedeljko Čabrinović, Trifko Grabež, Vaso Čubrilović (Bosnian Serbs) and Muhamed Mehmedbašić (from the Bosniaks community), from the movement known as Young Bosnia, took up positions along the Archduke's motorcade route, to assassinate him.
Supplied with arms by extremists within the Serbian Black Hand intelligence organisation, they hoped his death would free Bosnia from Austrian rule.
Čabrinović threw a grenade at the Archduke's car and injured two of his aides.
The other assassins were also unsuccessful.
An hour later, as Ferdinand was returning from visiting the injured officers in hospital, his car took a wrong turn into a street where Gavrilo Princip was standing.
He fired two pistol shots, fatally wounding Ferdinand and his wife Sophie.
According to historian Zbyněk Zeman, in Vienna "the event almost failed to make any impression whatsoever.
On 28 and 29 June, the crowds listened to music and drank wine, as if nothing had happened.
Austro-Hungarian authorities encouraged subsequent anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo.
Violent actions against ethnic Serbs were also organised outside Sarajevo, in other cities in Austro-Hungarian-controlled Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Slovenia.
Austro-Hungarian authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina imprisoned approximately 5,500 prominent Serbs, 700 to 2,200 of whom died in prison.
A further 460 Serbs were sentenced to death.
A predominantly Bosniak special militia known as the Schutzkorps was established, and carried out the persecution of Serbs.
The assassination initiated the July Crisis, a month of diplomatic manoeuvring among Austria-Hungary, Germany, Russia, France and Britain.
Believing that Serbian intelligence helped organise Franz Ferdinand's murder, Austrian officials wanted to use the opportunity to end Serbian interference in Bosnia and saw war as the best way of achieving this.
However, the Foreign Ministry had no solid proof of Serbian involvement.
On 23 July, Austria delivered an ultimatum to Serbia, listing ten demands made intentionally unacceptable to provide an excuse for starting hostilities.
Serbia ordered general mobilisation on 25 July, but accepted all the terms, except for those empowering Austrian representatives to suppress "subversive elements" inside Serbia, and take part in the investigation and trial of Serbians linked to the assassination.
Claiming this amounted to rejection, Austria broke off diplomatic relations and ordered partial mobilisation the next day; on 28 July, they declared war on Serbia and began shelling Belgrade.
Russia ordered general mobilisation in support of Serbia on 30 July.
Anxious to ensure backing from the SPD political opposition by presenting Russia as the aggressor, German Chancellor Bethmann Hollweg delayed the commencement of war preparations until 31 July.
That afternoon, the Russian government were handed a note requiring them to "cease all war measures against Germany and Austria-Hungary" within 12 hours.
A further German demand for neutrality was refused by the French who ordered general mobilisation but delayed declaring war.
The German General Staff had long assumed they faced a war on two fronts; the Schlieffen Plan envisaged using 80% of the army to defeat France, then switching to Russia.
Since this required them to move quickly, mobilisation orders were issued that afternoon.
Once the German ultimatum to Russia expired on the morning of 1 August, the two countries were at war.
At a meeting on 29 July, the British cabinet had narrowly decided its obligations to Belgium under the 1839 Treaty of London did not require it to oppose a German invasion with military force; however, Prime Minister Asquith and his senior Cabinet ministers were already committed to supporting France, the Royal Navy had been mobilised, and public opinion was strongly in favour of intervention.
On 31 July, Britain sent notes to Germany and France, asking them to respect Belgian neutrality; France pledged to do so, but Germany did not reply.
Aware of German plans to attack through Belgium, French Commander-in-Chief Joseph Joffre asked his government for permission to cross the border and pre-empt such a move.
To avoid violating Belgian neutrality, he was told any advance could come only after a German invasion.
Instead, the French cabinet ordered its Army to withdraw 10 km behind the German frontier, to avoid provoking war.
On 2 August, Germany occupied Luxembourg and exchanged fire with French units when German patrols entered French territory; on 3 August, they declared war on France and demanded free passage across Belgium, which was refused.
Early on the morning of 4 August, the Germans invaded, and Albert I of Belgium called for assistance under the Treaty of London.
Britain sent Germany an ultimatum demanding they withdraw from Belgium; when this expired at midnight, without a response, the two empires were at war.
Germany promised to support Austria-Hungary's invasion of Serbia, but interpretations of what this meant differed.
Previously tested deployment plans had been replaced early in 1914, but those had never been tested in exercises.
Austro-Hungarian leaders believed Germany would cover its northern flank against Russia.
Beginning on 12 August, the Austrians and Serbs clashed at the battles of the Cer and Kolubara; over the next two weeks, Austrian attacks were repulsed with heavy losses.
As a result, Austria had to keep sizeable forces on the Serbian front, weakening their efforts against Russia.
Serbia's victory against Austria-Hungary in the 1914 invasion has been called one of the major upset victories of the twentieth century.
In 1915, the campaign saw the first use of anti-aircraft warfare after an Austrian plane was shot down with ground-to-air fire, as well as the first medical evacuation by the Serbian army.
Upon mobilisation, in accordance with the Schlieffen Plan, 80% of the German Army was located on the Western Front, with the remainder acting as a screening force in the East.
Rather than a direct attack across their shared frontier, the German right wing would sweep through the Netherlands and Belgium, then swing south, encircling Paris and trapping the French army against the Swiss border.
The plan's creator, Alfred von Schlieffen, head of the German General Staff from 1891 to 1906, estimated that this would take six weeks, after which the German army would transfer to the East and defeat the Russians.
The plan was substantially modified by his successor, Helmuth von Moltke the Younger.
Under Schlieffen, 85% of German forces in the west were assigned to the right wing, with the remainder holding along the frontier.
By keeping his left-wing deliberately weak, he hoped to lure the French into an offensive into the "lost provinces" of Alsace-Lorraine, which was the strategy envisaged by their Plan XVII.
However, Moltke grew concerned that the French might push too hard on his left flank and as the German Army increased in size from 1908 to 1914, he changed the allocation of forces between the two wings to 70:30.
He also considered Dutch neutrality essential for German trade and cancelled the incursion into the Netherlands, which meant any delays in Belgium threatened the viability of the plan.
Historian Richard Holmes argues that these changes meant the right wing was not strong enough to achieve decisive success.
The initial German advance in the West was very successful.
By the end of August, the Allied left, which included the British Expeditionary Force (BEF), was in full retreat, and the French offensive in Alsace-Lorraine was a disastrous failure, with casualties exceeding 260,000.
German planning provided broad strategic instructions while allowing army commanders considerable freedom in carrying them out at the front, but Alexander von Kluck used this freedom to disobey orders, opening a gap between the German armies as they closed on Paris.
The French army, reinforced by the British expeditionary corps, seized this opportunity to counter-attack and pushed the German army 40 to 80 km back.
Both armies were then so exhausted that no decisive move could be implemented, so they settled in trenches, with the vain hope of breaking through as soon as they could build local superiority.
In 1911, the Russian Stavka agreed with the French to attack Germany within fifteen days of mobilisation, ten days before the Germans had anticipated, although it meant the two Russian armies that entered East Prussia on 17 August did so without many of their support elements.
By the end of 1914, German troops held strong defensive positions inside France, controlled the bulk of France's domestic coalfields, and inflicted 230,000 more casualties than it lost itself.
However, communications problems and questionable command decisions cost Germany the chance of a decisive outcome, while it had failed to achieve the primary objective of avoiding a long, two-front war.
As was apparent to several German leaders, this amounted to a strategic defeat; shortly after the First Battle of the Marne, Crown Prince Wilhelm told an American reporter "We have lost the war.
It will go on for a long time but lost it is already.
On 30 August 1914, New Zealand occupied German Samoa (now Samoa).
On 11 September, the Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force landed on the island of New Britain, then part of German New Guinea.
On 28 October, the German cruiser SMS Emden sank the Russian cruiser Zhemchug in the Battle of Penang.
Japan declared war on Germany before seizing territories in the Pacific, which later became the South Seas Mandate, as well as German Treaty ports on the Chinese Shandong peninsula at Tsingtao.
After Vienna refused to withdraw its cruiser SMS Kaiserin Elisabeth from Tsingtao, Japan declared war on Austria-Hungary, and the ship was scuttled in November 1914.
Within a few months, Allied forces had seized all German territories in the Pacific, leaving only isolated commerce raiders and a few holdouts in New Guinea.
Some of the first clashes of the war involved British, French, and German colonial forces in Africa.
On 6–7 August, French and British troops invaded the German protectorates of Togoland and Kamerun.
On 10 August, German forces in South-West Africa attacked South Africa; sporadic and fierce fighting continued for the rest of the war.
The German colonial forces in German East Africa, led by Colonel Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck, fought a guerrilla warfare campaign and only surrendered two weeks after the armistice took effect in Europe.
Before the war, Germany had attempted to use Indian nationalism and pan-Islamism to its advantage, a policy continued post-1914 by instigating uprisings in India, while the Niedermayer–Hentig Expedition urged Afghanistan to join the war on the side of Central Powers.
However, contrary to British fears of a revolt in India, the outbreak of the war saw a reduction in nationalist activity.
Leaders from the Indian National Congress and other groups believed support for the British war effort would hasten Indian Home Rule, a promise allegedly made explicit in 1917 by Edwin Montagu, the Secretary of State for India.
In 1914, the British Indian Army was larger than the British Army itself, and between 1914 and 1918 an estimated 1.
In all, 140,000 soldiers served on the Western Front and nearly 700,000 in the Middle East, with 47,746 killed and 65,126 wounded.
The suffering engendered by the war, as well as the failure of the British government to grant self-government to India afterward, bred disillusionment, resulting in the campaign for full independence led by Mahatma Gandhi.
Pre-war military tactics that had emphasised open warfare and individual riflemen proved obsolete when confronted with conditions prevailing in 1914.
Barbed wire, machine guns and artillery allowed the creation of strong defensive systems that made massed infantry advances extremely difficult.
Both sides struggled to develop tactics for breaching entrenched positions without heavy casualties.
In time, the tank helped to make the front more mobile.
After the First Battle of the Marne in September 1914, Allied and German forces unsuccessfully tried to outflank each other, a series of manoeuvres later known as the "Race to the Sea".
By the end of 1914, the opposing forces confronted each other along an uninterrupted line of entrenched positions from the Channel to the Swiss border.
Since the Germans were normally able to choose where to stand, they generally held the high ground, while their trenches tended to be better built; those constructed by the French and English were initially considered "temporary", only needed until an offensive would destroy the German defences.
Both sides tried to break the stalemate using scientific and technological advances.
On 22 April 1915, at the Second Battle of Ypres, the Germans (violating the Hague Convention) used chlorine gas for the first time on the Western Front.
In February 1916, the Germans attacked French defensive positions at the Battle of Verdun, lasting until December 1916.
Casualties were greater for the French, but the Germans bled heavily as well, with anywhere from 700,000 to 975,000 casualties between the two combatants.
Verdun became a symbol of French determination and self-sacrifice.
The Battle of the Somme was an Anglo-French offensive from July to November 1916.
The opening day, on 1 July 1916, was the bloodiest single day in the history of the British Army, which suffered 57,500 casualties, including 19,200 dead.
As a whole, the Somme offensive led to an estimated 420,000 British casualties, along with 200,000 French and 500,000 Germans.
The diseases that emerged in the trenches were a major killer on both sides.
The living conditions led to disease and infection, such as trench foot, lice, typhus, trench fever, and the 'Spanish flu'.
At the start of the war, German cruisers were scattered across the globe, some of which were subsequently used to attack Allied merchant shipping.
These were systematically hunted down by the Royal Navy, though not before causing considerable damage.
One of the most successful was the SMS Emden, part of the German East Asia Squadron stationed at Qingdao, which seized or sank 15 merchantmen, a Russian cruiser and a French destroyer.
Most of the squadron was returning to Germany when it sank two British armoured cruisers at the Battle of Coronel in November 1914, before being virtually destroyed at the Battle of the Falkland Islands in December.
The SMS Dresden escaped with a few auxiliaries, but after the Battle of Más a Tierra, these too were either destroyed or interned.
Soon after the outbreak of hostilities, Britain began a naval blockade of Germany.
This proved effective in cutting off vital supplies, though it violated accepted international law.
Britain also mined international waters which closed off entire sections of the ocean, even to neutral ships.
Since there was limited response to this tactic, Germany expected a similar response to its unrestricted submarine warfare.
The Battle of Jutland in May/June 1916 was the only full-scale clash of battleships during the war, and one of the largest in history.
The clash was indecisive, though the Germans inflicted more damage than they received; thereafter the bulk of the German High Seas Fleet was confined to port.
German U-boats attempted to cut the supply lines between North America and Britain.
The nature of submarine warfare meant that attacks often came without warning, giving the crews of the merchant ships little hope of survival.
The United States launched a protest, and Germany changed its rules of engagement.
After the sinking of the passenger ship RMS Lusitania in 1915, Germany promised not to target passenger liners, while Britain armed its merchant ships, placing them beyond the protection of the "cruiser rules", which demanded warning and movement of crews to "a place of safety" (a standard that lifeboats did not meet).
Finally, in early 1917, Germany adopted a policy of unrestricted submarine warfare, realising the Americans would eventually enter the war.
Germany sought to strangle Allied sea lanes before the United States could transport a large army overseas, but, after initial successes, eventually failed to do so.
The U-boat threat lessened in 1917, when merchant ships began travelling in convoys, escorted by destroyers.
This tactic made it difficult for U-boats to find targets, which significantly lessened losses; after the hydrophone and depth charges were introduced, destroyers could potentially successfully attack a submerged submarine.
Convoys slowed the flow of supplies since ships had to wait as convoys were assembled; the solution was an extensive program of building new freighters.
Troopships were too fast for the submarines and did not travel the North Atlantic in convoys.
The U-boats sunk more than 5,000 Allied ships, at the cost of 199 submarines.
World War I also saw the first use of aircraft carriers in combat, with HMS Furious launching Sopwith Camels in a successful raid against the Zeppelin hangars at Tondern in July 1918, as well as blimps for antisubmarine patrol.
Faced with Russia in the east, Austria-Hungary could spare only one-third of its army to attack Serbia.
After suffering heavy losses, the Austrians briefly occupied the Serbian capital, Belgrade.
A Serbian counter-attack in the Battle of Kolubara succeeded in driving them from the country by the end of 1914.
For the first 10 months of 1915, Austria-Hungary used most of its military reserves to fight Italy.
German and Austro-Hungarian diplomats scored a coup by persuading Bulgaria to join the attack on Serbia.
The Austro-Hungarian provinces of Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia provided troops for Austria-Hungary.
Montenegro allied itself with Serbia.
Bulgaria declared war on Serbia on 14 October 1915, and joined in the attack by the Austro-Hungarian army under Mackensen's army of 250,000 that was already underway.
Serbia was conquered in a little more than a month, as the Central Powers, now including Bulgaria, sent in 600,000 troops in total.
The Serbian army, fighting on two fronts and facing certain defeat, retreated into northern Albania.
The Serbs suffered defeat in the Battle of Kosovo.
Montenegro covered the Serbian retreat toward the Adriatic coast in the Battle of Mojkovac on 6–7 January 1916, but ultimately the Austrians also conquered Montenegro.
The surviving Serbian soldiers were evacuated to Greece.
After the conquest, Serbia was divided between Austro-Hungary and Bulgaria.
In late 1915, a Franco-British force landed at Salonica in Greece to offer assistance and to pressure its government to declare war against the Central Powers.
However, the pro-German King Constantine I dismissed the pro-Allied government of Eleftherios Venizelos before the Allied expeditionary force arrived.
The Macedonian front was at first mostly static.
French and Serbian forces retook limited areas of Macedonia by recapturing Bitola on 19 November 1916, following the costly Monastir offensive, which brought stabilisation of the front.
Serbian and French troops finally made a breakthrough in September 1918 in the Vardar offensive, after most German and Austro-Hungarian troops had been withdrawn.
The Bulgarians were defeated at the Battle of Dobro Pole, and by 25 September British and French troops had crossed the border into Bulgaria proper as the Bulgarian army collapsed.
Bulgaria capitulated four days later, on 29 September 1918.
The German high command responded by despatching troops to hold the line, but these forces were too weak to re-establish a front.
The Allied breakthrough on the Macedonian front cut communications between the Ottoman Empire and the other Central Powers, and made Vienna vulnerable to attack.
Hindenburg and Ludendorff concluded that the strategic and operational balance had now shifted decidedly against the Central Powers and, a day after the Bulgarian collapse, insisted on an immediate peace settlement.
The Ottomans threatened Russia's Caucasian territories and Britain's communications with India via the Suez Canal.
The Ottoman Empire took advantage of the European powers' preoccupation with the war and conducted large-scale ethnic cleansing of the Armenian, Greek, and Assyrian Christian populations—the Armenian genocide, Greek genocide, and Assyrian genocide respectively.
The British and French opened overseas fronts with the Gallipoli (1915) and Mesopotamian campaigns (1914).
In Gallipoli, the Ottoman Empire successfully repelled the British, French, and Australian and New Zealand Army Corps (ANZACs).
In Mesopotamia, by contrast, after the defeat of the British defenders in the siege of Kut by the Ottomans (1915–1916), British Imperial forces reorganised and captured Baghdad in March 1917.
The British were aided in Mesopotamia by local Arab and Assyrian fighters, while the Ottomans employed local Kurdish and Turcoman tribes.
The Suez Canal was defended from Ottoman attacks in 1915 and 1916; in August 1916, a German and Ottoman force was defeated at the Battle of Romani by the ANZAC Mounted Division and the 52nd (Lowland) Infantry Division.
Following this victory, an Egyptian Expeditionary Force advanced across the Sinai Peninsula, pushing Ottoman forces back in the Battle of Magdhaba in December and the Battle of Rafa on the border between the Egyptian Sinai and Ottoman Palestine in January 1917.
Russian armies generally had success in the Caucasus campaign.
Enver Pasha, supreme commander of the Ottoman armed forces, dreamed of re-conquering central Asia and areas that had been previously lost to Russia.
He was, however, a poor commander.
He launched an offensive against the Russians in the Caucasus in December 1914 with 100,000 troops, insisting on a frontal attack against mountainous Russian positions in winter.
He lost 86% of his force at the Battle of Sarikamish.
General Nikolai Yudenich, the Russian commander from 1915 to 1916, drove the Turks out of most of the southern Caucasus.
The Ottoman Empire, with German support, invaded Persia (modern Iran) in December 1914 to cut off British and Russian access to petroleum reservoirs around Baku.
Persia, ostensibly neutral, had long been under British and Russian influence.
The Ottomans and Germans were aided by Kurdish and Azeri forces, together with a large number of major Iranian tribes, while the Russians and British had the support of Armenian and Assyrian forces.
The Persian campaign lasted until 1918 and ended in failure for the Ottomans and their allies.
However, the Russian withdrawal from the war in 1917 led Armenian and Assyrian forces to be cut off from supply lines, outnumbered, outgunned and isolated, forcing them to fight and flee towards British lines in northern Mesopotamia.
The Arab Revolt, instigated by the British Foreign Office, started in June 1916 with the Battle of Mecca, led by Sharif Hussein.
The Sharif declared the independence of the Kingdom of Hejaz and, with British assistance, conquered much of Ottoman-held Arabia, resulting finally in the Ottoman surrender of Damascus.
Fakhri Pasha, the Ottoman commander of Medina, resisted for more than 2+1⁄2 years during the siege of Medina before surrendering in January 1919.
The Senussi tribe, along the border of Italian Libya and British Egypt, incited and armed by the Turks, waged a small-scale guerrilla war against Allied troops.
The British were forced to dispatch 12,000 troops to oppose them in the Senussi campaign.
Their rebellion was finally crushed in mid-1916.
Total Allied casualties on the Ottoman fronts amounted to 650,000 men.
Total Ottoman casualties were 725,000, with 325,000 dead and 400,000 wounded.
Though Italy joined the Triple Alliance in 1882, a treaty with its traditional Austrian enemy was so controversial that subsequent governments denied its existence and the terms were only made public in 1915.
This arose from nationalist designs on Austro-Hungarian territory in Trentino, the Austrian Littoral, Rijeka and Dalmatia, considered vital to secure the borders established in 1866.
In 1902, Rome secretly had agreed with France to remain neutral if the latter was attacked by Germany, effectively nullifying its role in the Triple Alliance.
When the war began in 1914, Italy argued the Triple Alliance was defensive and it was not obliged to support an Austrian attack on Serbia.
Opposition to joining the Central Powers increased when Turkey became a member in September, since in 1911 Italy had occupied Ottoman possessions in Libya and the Dodecanese islands.
To secure Italian neutrality, the Central Powers offered them Tunisia, while in return for an immediate entry into the war, the Allies agreed to their demands for Austrian territory and sovereignty over the Dodecanese.
Although they remained secret, these provisions were incorporated into the April 1915 Treaty of London, and Italy joined the Allies.
On 23 May, Italy declared war on Austria-Hungary, and on Germany fifteen months later.
The pre-1914 Italian army was short of officers, trained men, adequate transport and modern weapons; by April 1915, some of these deficiencies had been remedied but it was still unprepared for the major offensive required by the Treaty of London.
The advantage of superior numbers was offset by the difficult terrain; much of the fighting took place high in the Alps and Dolomites, where trench lines had to be cut through rock and ice and keeping troops supplied was a major challenge.
These issues were exacerbated by unimaginative strategies and tactics.
Between 1915 and 1917, the Italian commander, Luigi Cadorna, undertook a series of frontal assaults along the Isonzo, which made little progress and cost many lives; by the end of the war, Italian combat deaths totalled around 548,000.
In the spring of 1916, the Austro-Hungarians counterattacked in Asiago in the Strafexpedition, but made little progress and were pushed by the Italians back to Tyrol.
Although Italy occupied southern Albania in May 1916, their main focus was the Isonzo front which, after the capture of Gorizia in August 1916, remained static until October 1917.
After a combined Austro-German force won a major victory at Caporetto, Cadorna was replaced by Armando Diaz who retreated more than 100 kilometres (62 mi) before holding positions along the Piave River.
A second Austrian offensive was repulsed in June 1918.
On 24 October, Diaz launched the Battle of Vittorio Veneto and initially met stubborn resistance, but with Austria-Hungary collapsing, Hungarian divisions in Italy demanded they be sent home.
When this was granted, many others followed and the Imperial army disintegrated, the Italians taking over 300,000 prisoners.
On 3 November, the Armistice of Villa Giusti ended hostilities between Austria-Hungary and Italy which occupied Trieste and areas along the Adriatic Sea awarded to it in 1915.
As previously agreed with French president Raymond Poincaré, Russian plans at the start of the war were to simultaneously advance into Austrian Galicia and East Prussia as soon as possible.
Although their attack on Galicia was largely successful, and the invasions achieved their aim of forcing Germany to divert troops from the Western Front, the speed of mobilisation meant they did so without much of their heavy equipment and support functions.
These weaknesses contributed to Russian defeats at Tannenberg and the Masurian Lakes in August and September 1914, forcing them to withdraw from East Prussia with heavy losses.
By spring 1915, they had also retreated from Galicia, and the May 1915 Gorlice–Tarnów offensive allowed the Central Powers to invade Russian-occupied Poland.
Despite the successful June 1916 Brusilov offensive against the Austrians in eastern Galicia, shortages of supplies, heavy losses and command failures prevented the Russians from fully exploiting their victory.
However, it was one of the most significant offensives of the war, diverting German resources from Verdun, relieving Austro-Hungarian pressure on the Italians, and convincing Romania to enter the war on the side of the Allies on 27 August.
It also fatally weakened both the Austrian and Russian armies, whose offensive capabilities were badly affected by their losses and increased disillusion with the war that ultimately led to the Russian revolutions.
Meanwhile, unrest grew in Russia as Tsar Nicholas II remained at the front, with the home front controlled by Empress Alexandra.
Her increasingly incompetent rule and food shortages in urban areas led to widespread protests and the murder of her favourite, Grigori Rasputin, at the end of 1916.
Despite secretly agreeing to support the Triple Alliance in 1883, Romania increasingly found itself at odds with the Central Powers over their support for Bulgaria in the Balkan Wars and the status of ethnic Romanian communities in Hungarian-controlled Transylvania, which comprised an estimated 2.
With the ruling elite split into pro-German and pro-Entente factions, Romania remained neutral for two years while allowing Germany and Austria to transport military supplies and advisors across Romanian territory.
In September 1914, Russia acknowledged Romanian rights to Austro-Hungarian territories including Transylvania and Banat, whose acquisition had widespread popular support, and Russian success against Austria led Romania to join the Entente in the August 1916 Treaty of Bucharest.
Under the strategic plan known as Hypothesis Z, the Romanian army planned an offensive into Transylvania, while defending Southern Dobruja and Giurgiu against a possible Bulgarian counterattack.
On 27 August 1916, they attacked Transylvania and occupied substantial parts of the province before being driven back by the recently formed German 9th Army, led by former Chief of Staff Erich von Falkenhayn.
A combined German-Bulgarian-Turkish offensive captured Dobruja and Giurgiu, although the bulk of the Romanian army managed to escape encirclement and retreated to Bucharest, which surrendered to the Central Powers on 6 December 1916.
In the summer of 1917, a Central Powers offensive began in Romania under the command of August von Mackensen to knock Romania out of the war, resulting in the battles of Oituz, Mărăști and Mărășești, where up to 1,000,000 Central Powers troops were present.
The battles lasted from 22 July to 3 September and eventually the Romanian army was victorious advancing 500 km2.
August von Mackensen could not plan for another offensive as he had to transfer troops to the Italian Front.
Following the Russian revolution, Romania found itself alone on the Eastern Front and signed the Treaty of Bucharest with the Central Powers, which recognised Romanian sovereignty over Bessarabia in return for ceding control of passes in the Carpathian Mountains to Austria-Hungary and leasing its oil wells to Germany.
Although approved by Parliament, King Ferdinand I refused to sign it, hoping for an Allied victory in the west.
Romania re-entered the war on 10 November 1918, on the side of the Allies and the Treaty of Bucharest was formally annulled by the Armistice of 11 November 1918.
On 12 December 1916, after ten brutal months of the Battle of Verdun and a successful offensive against Romania, Germany attempted to negotiate a peace with the Allies.
However, this attempt was rejected out of hand as a "duplicitous war ruse".
US president Woodrow Wilson attempted to intervene as a peacemaker, asking for both sides to state their demands.
Lloyd George's War Cabinet considered the German offer to be a ploy to create divisions among the Allies.
After initial outrage and much deliberation, they took Wilson's note as a separate effort, signalling that the US was on the verge of entering the war against Germany following the "submarine outrages".
While the Allies debated a response to Wilson's offer, the Germans chose to rebuff it in favour of "a direct exchange of views".
Learning of the German response, the Allied governments were free to make clear demands in their response of 14 January.
They sought restoration of damages, the evacuation of occupied territories, reparations for France, Russia and Romania, and a recognition of the principle of nationalities.
The Allies sought guarantees that would prevent or limit future wars.
The negotiations failed and the Entente powers rejected the German offer on the grounds of honour, and noted Germany had not put forward any specific proposals.
By the end of 1916, Russian casualties totalled nearly five million killed, wounded or captured, with major urban areas affected by food shortages and high prices.
In March 1917, Tsar Nicholas ordered the military to forcibly suppress strikes in Petrograd but the troops refused to fire on the crowds.
Revolutionaries set up the Petrograd Soviet and fearing a left-wing takeover, the State Duma forced Nicholas to abdicate and established the Russian Provisional Government, which confirmed Russia's willingness to continue the war.
However, the Petrograd Soviet refused to disband, creating competing power centres and causing confusion and chaos, with frontline soldiers becoming increasingly demoralised.
Following the tsar's abdication, Vladimir Lenin—with the help of the German government—was ushered from Switzerland into Russia on 16 April 1917.
Discontent and the weaknesses of the Provisional Government led to a rise in the popularity of the Bolshevik Party, led by Lenin, which demanded an immediate end to the war.
The Revolution of November was followed in December by an armistice and negotiations with Germany.
At first, the Bolsheviks refused the German terms, but when German troops began marching across Ukraine unopposed, they acceded to the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk on 3 March 1918.
The treaty ceded vast territories, including Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and parts of Poland and Ukraine to the Central Powers.
With the Russian Empire out of the war, Romania found itself alone on the Eastern Front and signed the Treaty of Bucharest with the Central Powers in May 1918.
Under the terms of the treaty, Romania ceded territory to Austria-Hungary and Bulgaria and leased its oil reserves to Germany.
However, the terms also included the Central Powers' recognition of the union of Bessarabia with Romania.
The United States was a major supplier of war materiel to the Allies but remained neutral in 1914, in large part due to domestic opposition.
The most significant factor in creating the support Wilson needed was the German submarine offensive, which not only cost American lives but paralysed trade as ships were reluctant to put to sea.
On 6 April 1917, Congress declared war on Germany as an "Associated Power" of the Allies.
The US Navy sent a battleship group to Scapa Flow to join the Grand Fleet, and provided convoy escorts.
In April 1917, the US Army had fewer than 300,000 men, including National Guard units, compared to British and French armies of 4.
The Selective Service Act of 1917 drafted 2.
By June 1918, over 667,000 members of the American Expeditionary Forces (AEF) were transported to France, a figure which reached 2 million by the end of November.
Despite his conviction that Germany must be defeated, Wilson went to war to ensure the US played a leading role in shaping the peace, which meant preserving the AEF as a separate military force, rather than being absorbed into British or French units as his Allies wanted.
He was strongly supported by AEF commander General John J.
Pershing, a proponent of pre-1914 "open warfare" who considered the French and British emphasis on artillery misguided and incompatible with American "offensive spirit".
Much to the frustration of his Allies, who had suffered heavy losses in 1917, he insisted on retaining control of American troops, and refused to commit them to the front line until able to operate as independent units.
As a result, the first significant US involvement was the Meuse–Argonne offensive in late September 1918.
In December 1916, Robert Nivelle replaced Pétain as commander of French armies on the Western Front and began planning a spring attack in Champagne, part of a joint Franco-British operation.
Poor security meant German intelligence was well informed on tactics and timetables, but despite this, when the attack began on 16 April the French made substantial gains, before being brought to a halt by the newly built and extremely strong defences of the Hindenburg Line.
Nivelle persisted with frontal assaults and, by 25 April, the French had suffered nearly 135,000 casualties, including 30,000 dead, most incurred in the first two days.
Concurrent British attacks at Arras were more successful, though ultimately of little strategic value.
Operating as a separate unit for the first time, the Canadian Corps' capture of Vimy Ridge is viewed by many Canadians as a defining moment in creating a sense of national identity.
Though Nivelle continued the offensive, on 3 May the 21st Division, which had been involved in some of the heaviest fighting at Verdun, refused orders to go into battle, initiating the French Army mutinies; within days, "collective indiscipline" had spread to 54 divisions, while over 20,000 deserted.
In March and April 1917, at the First and Second Battles of Gaza, German and Ottoman forces stopped the advance of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force, which had begun in August 1916 at the Battle of Romani.
At the end of October 1917, the Sinai and Palestine campaign resumed, when General Edmund Allenby's XXth Corps, XXI Corps and Desert Mounted Corps won the Battle of Beersheba.
Two Ottoman armies were defeated a few weeks later at the Battle of Mughar Ridge and, early in December, Jerusalem had been captured following another Ottoman defeat at the Battle of Jerusalem.
About this time, Friedrich Freiherr Kress von Kressenstein was relieved of his duties as the Eighth Army's commander, replaced by Djevad Pasha, and a few months later the commander of the Ottoman Army in Palestine, Erich von Falkenhayn, was replaced by Otto Liman von Sanders.
In early 1918, the front line was extended and the Jordan Valley was occupied, following the First Transjordan and the Second Transjordan attacks by British Empire forces in March and April 1918.
In December 1917, the Central Powers signed an armistice with Russia, thus freeing large numbers of German troops for use in the West.
With German reinforcements and new American troops pouring in, the outcome was to be decided on the Western Front.
The Central Powers knew that they could not win a protracted war, but they held high hopes for success in a final quick offensive.
Ludendorff drew up plans (Operation Michael) for the 1918 offensive on the Western Front.
The operation commenced on 21 March 1918, with an attack on British forces near Saint-Quentin.
German forces achieved an unprecedented advance of 60 kilometres (37 mi).
The initial offensive was a success; after heavy fighting, however, the offensive was halted.
Lacking tanks or motorised artillery, the Germans were unable to consolidate their gains.
The problems of re-supply were also exacerbated by increasing distances that now stretched over terrain that was shell-torn and often impassable to traffic.
Germany launched Operation Georgette against the northern English Channel ports.
The Allies halted the drive after limited territorial gains by Germany.
The German Army to the south then conducted Operations Blücher and Yorck, pushing broadly towards Paris.
Germany launched Operation Marne (Second Battle of the Marne) on 15 July, in an attempt to encircle Reims.
The resulting counter-attack, which started the Hundred Days Offensive on 8 August, led to a marked collapse in German morale.
By September, the Germans had fallen back to the Hindenburg Line.
The Allies had advanced to the Hindenburg Line in the north and centre.
German forces launched numerous counterattacks, but positions and outposts of the Line continued falling, with the BEF alone taking 30,441 prisoners in the last week of September.
On 24 September, the Supreme Army Command informed the leaders in Berlin that armistice talks were inevitable.
The final assault on the Hindenburg Line began with the Meuse-Argonne offensive, launched by American and French troops on 26 September.
Two days later the Belgians, French and British attacked around Ypres, and the day after the British at St Quentin in the centre of the line.
The following week, cooperating American and French units broke through in Champagne at the Battle of Blanc Mont Ridge ( 3–27 October), forcing the Germans off the commanding heights, and closing towards the Belgian frontier.
On 8 October, the Hindenburg Line was pierced by British and Dominion troops of the First and Third British Armies at the Second Battle of Cambrai.
Allied forces started the Vardar offensive on 15 September at two key points: Dobro Pole and near Dojran Lake.
In the Battle of Dobro Pole, the Serbian and French armies had success after a three-day-long battle with relatively small casualties, and subsequently made a breakthrough in the front, something which was rarely seen in World War I.
After the front was broken, Allied forces started to liberate Serbia and reached Skopje at 29 September, after which Bulgaria signed an armistice with the Allies on 30 September.
The collapse of the Central Powers came swiftly.
Bulgaria was the first to sign an armistice, the Armistice of Salonica on 29 September 1918.
Wilhelm II, in a telegram to Tsar Ferdinand I of Bulgaria described the situation thus: "Disgraceful!
On the same day, the German Supreme Army Command informed Wilhelm II and the Imperial Chancellor Count Georg von Hertling, that the military situation facing Germany was hopeless.
On 24 October, the Italians began a push that rapidly recovered territory lost after the Battle of Caporetto.
This culminated in the Battle of Vittorio Veneto, marking the end of the Austro-Hungarian Army as an effective fighting force.
The offensive also triggered the disintegration of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
During the last week of October, declarations of independence were made in Budapest, Prague, and Zagreb.
On 29 October, the imperial authorities asked Italy for an armistice, but the Italians continued advancing, reaching Trento, Udine, and Trieste.
On 3 November, Austria-Hungary sent a flag of truce and accepted the Armistice of Villa Giusti, arranged with the Allied Authorities in Paris.
Austria and Hungary signed separate armistices following the overthrow of the Habsburg monarchy.
In the following days, the Italian Army occupied Innsbruck and all Tyrol, with over 20,000 soldiers.
On 30 October, the Ottoman Empire capitulated, and signed the Armistice of Mudros.
With the military faltering and with widespread loss of confidence in the kaiser, Germany moved towards surrender.
Prince Maximilian of Baden took charge on 3 October as Chancellor of Germany.
Negotiations with President Wilson began immediately, in the hope that he would offer better terms than the British and French.
Wilson demanded a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary control over the German military.
The German Revolution of 1918–1919 began at the end of October 1918.
Units of the German Navy refused to set sail for a large-scale operation in a war they believed to be as good as lost.
The sailors' revolt, which then ensued in the naval ports of Wilhelmshaven and Kiel, spread across the whole country within days and led to the proclamation of a republic on 9 November 1918, shortly thereafter to the abdication of Wilhelm II, and German surrender.
In the aftermath of the war, the German, Austro-Hungarian, Ottoman, and Russian empires disappeared.
Numerous nations regained their former independence, and new ones were created.
Four dynasties fell as a result of the war: the Romanovs, the Hohenzollerns, the Habsburgs, and the Ottomans.
Belgium and Serbia were badly damaged, as was France, with 1.
Germany and Russia were similarly affected.
A formal state of war between the two sides persisted for another seven months, until the signing of the Treaty of Versailles with Germany on 28 June 1919.
The US Senate did not ratify the treaty despite public support for it,and did not formally end its involvement in the war until the Knox–Porter Resolution was signed on 2 July 1921 by President Warren G.
Germany on 10 January 1920.
Austria on 16 July 1920.
Bulgaria on 9 August 1920.
Hungary on 26 July 1921.
Turkey on 6 August 1924.
Some war memorials date the end of the war as being when the Versailles Treaty was signed in 1919, which was when many of the troops serving abroad finally returned home; by contrast, most commemorations of the war's end concentrate on the armistice of 11 November 1918.
The Paris Peace Conference imposed a series of peace treaties on the Central Powers officially ending the war.
The 1919 Treaty of Versailles dealt with Germany and, building on Wilson's 14th point, established the League of Nations on 28 June 1919.
The Central Powers had to acknowledge responsibility for "all the loss and damage to which the Allied and Associated Governments and their nationals have been subjected as a consequence of the war imposed upon them by" their aggression.
In the Treaty of Versailles, this statement was Article 231.
This article became known as the "War Guilt Clause", as the majority of Germans felt humiliated and resentful.
The Germans felt they had been unjustly dealt with by what they called the "diktat of Versailles".
German historian Hagen Schulze said the Treaty placed Germany "under legal sanctions, deprived of military power, economically ruined, and politically humiliated.
Active denial of war guilt in Germany and German resentment at both reparations and continued Allied occupation of the Rhineland made widespread revision of the meaning and memory of the war problematic.
The legend of the "stab in the back" and the wish to revise the "Versailles diktat", and the belief in an international threat aimed at the elimination of the German nation persisted at the heart of German politics.
Even a man of peace such as [Gustav] Stresemann publicly rejected German guilt.
As for the Nazis, they waved the banners of domestic treason and international conspiracy in an attempt to galvanise the German nation into a spirit of revenge.
Like a Fascist Italy, Nazi Germany sought to redirect the memory of the war to the benefit of its policies.
Meanwhile, new nations liberated from German rule viewed the treaty as a recognition of wrongs committed against small nations by much larger aggressive neighbours.
Austria-Hungary was partitioned into several successor states, largely but not entirely along ethnic lines.
Czechoslovakia, Italy, Poland, Romania and Yugoslavia received territories from the Dual Monarchy (while the formerly separate and autonomous Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia was incorporated into Yugoslavia).
The details were contained in the treaties of Saint-Germain-en-Laye and Trianon.
As a result, Hungary lost 64% of its total population, decreasing from 20.
According to the 1910 census, speakers of the Hungarian language included approximately 54% of the entire population of the Kingdom of Hungary.
Within the country, numerous ethnic minorities were present: 16.
Between 1920 and 1924, 354,000 Hungarians fled former Hungarian territories attached to Romania, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia.
The Russian Empire lost much of its western frontier as the newly independent nations of Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland were carved from it.
Romania took control of Bessarabia in April 1918.
After 123 years, Poland re-emerged as an independent country.
The Kingdom of Serbia and its dynasty, as a "minor Entente nation" and the country with the most casualties per capita, became the backbone of a new multinational state, the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, later renamed Yugoslavia.
Czechoslovakia, combining the Kingdom of Bohemia with parts of the Kingdom of Hungary, became a new nation.
Romania would unite all Romanian-speaking people under a single state, leading to Greater Romania.
In Australia and New Zealand, the Battle of Gallipoli became known as those nations' "Baptism of Fire".
It was the first major war in which the newly established countries fought, and it was one of the first times that Australian troops fought as Australians, not just subjects of the British Crown, and independent national identities for these nations took hold.
Anzac Day, named after the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps (ANZAC), commemorates this defining moment.
In the aftermath of World War I, Greece fought against Turkish nationalists led by Mustafa Kemal, a war that eventually resulted in a massive population exchange between the two countries under the Treaty of Lausanne.
According to various sources, several hundred thousand Greeks died during this period, which was tied in with the Greek genocide.
An estimated number of military and civilian casualties in World War I was about 15 to 22 million deaths and about 23 million wounded military personnel, ranking it among the deadliest conflicts in human history.
The total number of deaths includes between 9 and 11 million military personnel, with an estimated civilian death toll of about 6 to 13 million.
Of the 60 million European military personnel who were mobilised from 1914 to 1918, an estimated 8 million were killed, 7 million were permanently disabled, and 15 million were seriously injured.
Approximately 15,000 deployed men sustained gruesome facial injuries, causing social stigma and marginalisation; they were called the gueules cassées (broken faces).
In Germany, civilian deaths were 474,000 higher than in peacetime, due in large part to food shortages and malnutrition that had weakened disease resistance.
These excess deaths are estimated as 271,000 in 1918, plus another 71,000 in the first half of 1919 when the blockade was still in effect.
Starvation caused by famine killed approximately 100,000 people in Lebanon.
Diseases flourished in the chaotic wartime conditions.
In 1914 alone, louse-borne epidemic typhus killed 200,000 in Serbia.
Starting in early 1918, a major influenza epidemic known as Spanish flu spread across the world, accelerated by the movement of large numbers of soldiers, often crammed together in camps and transport ships with poor sanitation.
The Spanish flu killed at least 17 to 25 million people, including an estimated 2.
Between 1915 and 1926, an epidemic of encephalitis lethargica affected nearly 5 million people worldwide.
Eight million equines, mostly horses, donkeys and mules died, three-quarters of them from the extreme conditions they worked in.
The German army was the first to successfully deploy chemical weapons during the Second Battle of Ypres (April–May 1915), after German scientists under the direction of Fritz Haber at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute developed a method to weaponise chlorine.
The use of chemical weapons had been sanctioned by the German High Command to force Allied soldiers out of their entrenched positions, complementing rather than supplanting more lethal conventional weapons.
Chemical weapons were deployed by all major belligerents throughout the war, inflicting approximately 1.
The use of chemical weapons in warfare was a direct violation of the 1899 Hague Declaration Concerning Asphyxiating Gases and the 1907 Hague Convention on Land Warfare, which prohibited their use.
The ethnic cleansing of the Ottoman Empire's Armenian population, including mass deportations and executions, during the final years of the Ottoman Empire is considered genocide.
The Ottomans carried out organised and systematic massacres of the Armenian population at the beginning of the war and manipulated acts of Armenian resistance by portraying them as rebellions to justify further extermination.
In early 1915, several Armenians volunteered to join the Russian forces and the Ottoman government used this as a pretext to issue the Tehcir Law (Law on Deportation), which authorised the deportation of Armenians from the Empire's eastern provinces to Syria between 1915 and 1918.
The Armenians were intentionally marched to death and a number were attacked by Ottoman brigands.
While the exact number of deaths is unknown, the International Association of Genocide Scholars estimates around 1.
The government of Turkey continues to deny the genocide to the present day, arguing that those who died were victims of inter-ethnic fighting, famine, or disease during World War I; these claims are rejected by most historians.
Other ethnic groups were similarly attacked by the Ottoman Empire during this period, including Assyrians and Greeks, and some scholars consider those events to be part of the same policy of extermination.
At least 250,000 Assyrian Christians, about half of the population, and 350,000–750,000 Anatolian and Pontic Greeks were killed between 1915 and 1922.
About 8 million soldiers surrendered and were held in POW camps during the war.
All nations pledged to follow the Hague Conventions on fair treatment of prisoners of war, and the survival rate for POWs was generally much higher than that of combatants at the front.
Around 25–31% of Russian losses (as a proportion of those captured, wounded, or killed) were to prisoner status; for Austria-Hungary 32%; for Italy 26%; for France 12%; for Germany 9%; for Britain 7%.
Prisoners from the Allied armies totalled about 1.
From the Central Powers, about 3.
Allied personnel was around 42,928,000, while Central personnel was near 25,248,000.
British soldiers of the war were initially volunteers but were increasingly conscripted.
Surviving veterans returning home often found they could discuss their experiences only among themselves, so formed "veterans' associations" or "Legions".
Conscription was common in most European countries, but was controversial in English-speaking countries.
It was especially unpopular among minority ethnicities, especially the Irish Catholics in Ireland, Australia, and the French Catholics in Canada.
In the US, conscription began in 1917; while the country avoided the outright draft riots that occurred during the Civil War, and was able to splinter opposition through heavy pressure and sometimes outright repression, resistance was nonetheless considerable, particularly in rural areas and in the South.
The administration decided to rely primarily on conscription, rather than voluntary enlistment, to raise military manpower after only 73,000 volunteers enlisted out of the initial 1 million target in the first six weeks of war.
Military and civilian observers from every major power closely followed the course of the war.
Many were able to report on events from a perspective somewhat akin to modern "embedded" positions within the opposing land and naval forces.
Macro- and micro-economic consequences devolved from the war.
Families were altered by the departure of many men.
With the death or absence of the primary wage earner, women were forced into the workforce in unprecedented numbers.
At the same time, the industry needed to replace the lost labourers sent to war.
The movement of women into industry and traditionally male labour ultimately aided the struggle for voting rights for women.
In all nations, the government's share of GDP increased, surpassing 50% in both Germany and France and nearly reaching that level in Britain.
To pay for purchases in the US, Britain cashed in its extensive investments in American railroads and then began borrowing heavily from Wall Street.
President Wilson was on the verge of cutting off the loans in late 1916 but allowed a great increase in US government lending to the Allies.
After 1919, the US demanded repayment of these loans.
The repayments were, in part, funded by German reparations that, in turn, were supported by American loans to Germany.
This circular system collapsed in 1931 and some loans were never repaid.
Britain still owed the United States $4.
Britain turned to her colonies for help in obtaining essential war materials whose supply from traditional sources had become difficult.
Geologists such as Albert Kitson were called on to find new resources of precious minerals in the African colonies.
Kitson discovered important new deposits of manganese, used in munitions production, in the Gold Coast.
Article 231 of the Treaty of Versailles (the so-called "war guilt" clause) stated Germany accepted responsibility for "all the loss and damage to which the Allied and Associated Governments and their nationals have been subjected as a consequence of the war imposed upon them by the aggression of Germany and her allies.
However, neither of them interpreted it as an admission of war guilt.
In 1921, the total reparation sum was placed at 132 billion gold marks.
However, "Allied experts knew that Germany could not pay" this sum.
The total sum was divided into three categories, with the third being "deliberately designed to be chimerical" and its "primary function was to mislead public opinion .
This figure could be paid in cash or in-kind (coal, timber, chemical dyes, etc.
Some of the territory lost—via the Treaty of Versailles—was credited towards the reparation figure as were other acts such as helping to restore the Library of Louvain.
By 1929, the Great Depression caused political chaos throughout the world.
In 1932 the payment of reparations was suspended by the international community, by which point Germany had paid only the equivalent of 20.
With the rise of Adolf Hitler, all bonds and loans that had been issued and taken out during the 1920s and early 1930s were cancelled.
David Andelman notes "Refusing to pay doesn't make an agreement null and void.
The bonds, the agreement, still exist.
On 3 October 2010, Germany made the final payment on these bonds.
The Australian prime minister, Billy Hughes, wrote to the British prime minister, David Lloyd George, "You have assured us that you cannot get better terms.
I much regret it, and hope even now that some way may be found of securing agreement for demanding reparation commensurate with the tremendous sacrifices made by the British Empire and her Allies.
In the Balkans, Yugoslav nationalists such as the leader, Ante Trumbić, strongly supported the war, desiring the freedom of Yugoslavs from Austria-Hungary and other foreign powers and the creation of an independent Yugoslavia.
The Yugoslav Committee, led by Trumbić, was formed in Paris on 30 April 1915, but shortly moved its office to London.
In April 1918, the Rome Congress of Oppressed Nationalities met, including Czechoslovak, Italian, Polish, Transylvanian, and Yugoslav representatives who urged the Allies to support national self-determination for the peoples residing within Austria-Hungary.
In the Middle East, Arab nationalism soared in Ottoman territories in response to the rise of Turkish nationalism during the war.
Arab nationalist leaders advocated the creation of a pan-Arab state.
In 1916, the Arab Revolt began in Ottoman-controlled territories of the Middle East to achieve independence.
In East Africa, Iyasu V of Ethiopia was supporting the Dervish state who were at war with the British in the Somaliland campaign.
Von Syburg, the German envoy in Addis Ababa, said, "now the time has come for Ethiopia to regain the coast of the Red Sea driving the Italians home, to restore the Empire to its ancient size.
Several socialist parties initially supported the war when it began in August 1914.
But European socialists split on national lines, with the concept of class conflict held by radical socialists such as Marxists and syndicalists being overborne by their patriotic support for the war.
Once the war began, Austrian, British, French, German, and Russian socialists followed the rising nationalist current by supporting their countries' intervention in the war.
Italian nationalism was stirred by the outbreak of the war and was initially strongly supported by a variety of political factions.
One of the most prominent and popular Italian nationalist supporters of the war was Gabriele D'Annunzio, who promoted Italian irredentism and helped sway the Italian public to support intervention in the war.
The Italian Liberal Party, under the leadership of Paolo Boselli, promoted intervention in the war on the side of the Allies and used the Dante Alighieri Society to promote Italian nationalism.
Italian socialists were divided on whether to support the war or oppose it; some were militant supporters of the war, including Benito Mussolini and Leonida Bissolati.
However, the Italian Socialist Party decided to oppose the war after anti-militarist protestors were killed, resulting in a general strike called Red Week.
The Italian Socialist Party purged itself of pro-war nationalist members, including Mussolini.
Mussolini formed the pro-interventionist Il Popolo d'Italia and the Fasci Rivoluzionario d'Azione Internazionalista ("Revolutionary Fasci for International Action") in October 1914 that later developed into the Fasci Italiani di Combattimento in 1919, the origin of fascism.
Mussolini's nationalism enabled him to raise funds from Ansaldo (an armaments firm) and other companies to create Il Popolo d'Italia to convince socialists and revolutionaries to support the war.
On both sides, there was large-scale fundraising for soldiers' welfare, their dependents and those injured.
The Nail Men were a German example.
Around the British Empire, there were many patriotic funds, including the Royal Patriotic Fund Corporation, Canadian Patriotic Fund, Queensland Patriotic Fund and, by 1919, there were 983 funds in New Zealand.
At the start of the next world war the New Zealand funds were reformed, having been criticised as overlapping, wasteful and abused, but 11 were still functioning in 2002.
Many countries jailed those who spoke out against the conflict.
These included Eugene Debs in the US and Bertrand Russell in Britain.
In the US, the Espionage Act of 1917 and Sedition Act of 1918 made it a federal crime to oppose military recruitment or make any statements deemed "disloyal".
Publications at all critical of the government were removed from circulation by postal censors, and many served long prison sentences for statements of fact deemed unpatriotic.
Several nationalists opposed intervention, particularly within states that the nationalists were hostile to.
Although the vast majority of Irish people consented to participate in the war in 1914 and 1915, a minority of advanced Irish nationalists had staunchly opposed taking part.
The war began amid the Home Rule crisis in Ireland that had resurfaced in 1912, and by July 1914 there was a serious possibility of an outbreak of civil war in Ireland.
Irish nationalists and Marxists attempted to pursue Irish independence, culminating in the Easter Rising of 1916, with Germany sending 20,000 rifles to Ireland to stir unrest in Britain.
The British government placed Ireland under martial law in response to the Easter Rising, though once the immediate threat of revolution had dissipated, the authorities did try to make concessions to nationalist feeling.
However, opposition to involvement in the war increased in Ireland, resulting in the Conscription Crisis of 1918.
Other opposition came from conscientious objectors—some socialist, some religious—who had refused to fight.
In Britain, 16,000 people asked for conscientious objector status.
Some of them, most notably prominent peace activist Stephen Hobhouse, refused both military and alternative service.
Many suffered years of prison, including solitary confinement.
Even after the war, in Britain, many job advertisements were marked "No conscientious objectors need to apply".
On 1–4 May 1917, about 100,000 workers and soldiers of Petrograd, and after them, the workers and soldiers of other Russian cities, led by the Bolsheviks, demonstrated under banners reading "Down with the war!
The mass demonstrations resulted in a crisis for the Russian Provisional Government.
In Milan, in May 1917, Bolshevik revolutionaries organised and engaged in rioting calling for an end to the war, and managed to close down factories and stop public transportation.
The Italian army was forced to enter Milan with tanks and machine guns to face Bolsheviks and anarchists, who fought violently until 23 May when the army gained control of the city.
Almost 50 people (including three Italian soldiers) were killed and over 800 people were arrested.
World War I began as a clash of 20th-century technology and 19th-century tactics, with the inevitably large ensuing casualties.
By the end of 1917, however, the major armies had modernised and were making use of telephone, wireless communication, armoured cars, tanks (especially with the advent of the prototype tank, Little Willie), and aircraft.
Several types of poison gas were used by both sides.
Although it never proved a decisive weapon, it became one of the most feared of the war.
Artillery also underwent a revolution.
In 1914, cannons were positioned in the front line and fired directly at their targets.
By 1917, indirect fire with guns (as well as mortars and even machine guns) was commonplace, using new techniques for spotting and ranging, notably, aircraft and the field telephone.
Fixed-wing aircraft were initially used for reconnaissance and ground attack.
To shoot down enemy planes, anti-aircraft guns and fighter aircraft were developed.
Strategic bombers were created, principally by the Germans and British, though the former used Zeppelins as well.
Towards the end of the conflict, aircraft carriers were used for the first time, with HMS Furious launching Sopwith Camels in a raid to destroy the Zeppelin hangars at Tønder in 1918.
The non-military diplomatic and propaganda interactions among the nations were designed to build support for the cause or to undermine support for the enemy.
For the most part, wartime diplomacy focused on five issues: propaganda campaigns; defining and redefining the war goals, which became harsher as the war went on; luring neutral nations (Italy, Ottoman Empire, Bulgaria, Romania) into the coalition by offering slices of enemy territory; and encouragement by the Allies of nationalistic minority movements inside the Central Powers, especially among Czechs, Poles, and Arabs.
In addition, multiple peace proposals were coming from neutrals, or one side or the other; none of them progressed very far.
Memorials were built in thousands of villages and towns.
Close to battlefields, those buried in improvised burial grounds were gradually moved to formal graveyards under the care of organisations such as the Commonwealth War Graves Commission, the American Battle Monuments Commission, the German War Graves Commission, and Le Souvenir français.
Many of these graveyards also have monuments to the missing or unidentified dead, such as the Menin Gate Memorial to the Missing and the Thiepval Memorial to the Missing of the Somme.
In 1915, John McCrae, a Canadian army doctor, wrote the poem In Flanders Fields as a salute to those who perished in the war.
It is still recited today, especially on Remembrance Day and Memorial Day.
National World War I Museum and Memorial in Kansas City, Missouri, is a memorial dedicated to all Americans who served in World War I.
The Liberty Memorial was dedicated on 1 November 1921.
The British government budgeted substantial resources to the commemoration of the war during the period 2014 to 2018.
The lead body is the Imperial War Museum.
On 3 August 2014, French President François Hollande and German President Joachim Gauck together marked the centenary of Germany's declaration of war on France by laying the first stone of a memorial in Vieil Armand, known in German as Hartmannswillerkopf, for French and German soldiers killed in the war.
As part of commemorations for the centenary of the 1918 Armistice, French President Emmanuel Macron and German Chancellor Angela Merkel visited the site of the signing of the Armistice of Compiègne and unveiled a plaque to reconciliation.
The first efforts to comprehend the meaning and consequences of modern warfare began during the initial phases of the war and are still underway more than a century later.
Teaching World War I has presented special challenges.
When compared with World War II, the First World War is often thought to be "a wrong war fought for the wrong reasons"; it lacks the metanarrative of good versus evil that characterises retellings of the Second World War.
Lacking recognisable heroes and villains, it is often taught thematically, invoking simplified tropes that obscure the complexity of the conflict.
Historian Heather Jones argues that the historiography has been reinvigorated by a cultural turn in the 21st century.
Scholars have raised entirely new questions regarding military occupation, radicalisation of politics, race, medical science, gender and mental health.
Among the major subjects that historians have long debated regarding the war include why the war began, why the Allies won, whether generals were responsible for high casualty rates, how soldiers endured the poor conditions of trench warfare, and to what extent the civilian home front accepted and endorsed the war effort.
As late as 2007, unexploded ordnance at battlefield sites like Verdun and Somme continued to pose a danger.
In France and Belgium, locals who discover caches of unexploded munitions are assisted by weapons disposal units.
In some places, plant life has still not recovered from the effects of the war.
The Library's collections contain a wide variety of materials related to the First World War (1914-18).
This guide provides access to the Library's digital collections, external websites, and a selected print bibliography related to the Great War.
California State Library, California History Room.
Collection: California.
State Council of Defense.
California War History Committee.
Records of Californians who served in World War I, 1918–1922.
World War II, or the Second World War (1 September 1939 – 2 September 1945), was a global conflict between two coalitions: the Allies and the Axis powers.
Nearly all of the world's countries participated.
Tanks and aircraft played major roles, the latter enabling the strategic bombing of cities and delivery of the only nuclear weapons used in war.
World War II was the deadliest conflict in history, causing the death of 60 to 75 million people.
Millions died as a result of massacres, starvation, disease, and genocides, including the Holocaust.
After the Allied victory, Germany, Austria, Japan, and Korea were occupied, and German and Japanese leaders were tried for war crimes.
The causes of World War II included unresolved tensions in the aftermath of World War I and the rise of fascism in Europe and militarism in Japan.
Key events preceding the war included Japan's invasion of Manchuria in 1931, the Spanish Civil War, the outbreak of the Second Sino-Japanese War in 1937, and Germany's annexations of Austria and the Sudetenland.
World War II is generally considered to have begun on 1 September 1939, when Nazi Germany, under Adolf Hitler, invaded Poland, after which the United Kingdom and France declared war on Germany.
Poland was also invaded by the Soviet Union in mid-September and was partitioned between Germany and the Soviet Union under the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact.
In 1940, the Soviet Union annexed the Baltic states and parts of Finland and Romania, while Germany conquered Norway, Denmark, Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands.
After the fall of France in June 1940, the war continued mainly between Germany, now assisted by Fascist Italy, and the British Empire and British Commonwealth, with fighting in the Balkans, Mediterranean and Middle East, East Africa, the aerial Battle of Britain and the Blitz, and the naval Battle of the Atlantic.
By mid-1941, Yugoslavia and Greece had also been defeated by Axis countries.
In June 1941, Germany invaded the Soviet Union, opening the Eastern Front.
In December 1941, Japan attacked American and British territories in Asia and the Pacific, including Pearl Harbor in Hawaii, leading the United States to enter the war against the Axis.
Japan conquered much of coastal China and Southeast Asia, but its advances in the Pacific were halted in June 1942 at the Battle of Midway.
In early 1943, Axis forces were defeated in North Africa and at Stalingrad in the Soviet Union.
An Allied invasion of Italy in July resulted in the fall of its fascist regime, and Allied offensives in the Pacific and the Soviet Union forced the Axis to retreat on all fronts.
In 1944, the Western Allies invaded France at Normandy, and the Soviet Union advanced into Central Europe.
Japan also suffered major setbacks including the crippling of its navy by the United States, the loss of key Western Pacific islands, and defeats in Burma.
The war in Europe concluded with the liberation of German-occupied territories and the invasion of Germany by the Allies, which culminated in the fall of Berlin to Soviet troops and Germany's unconditional surrender on 8 May 1945.
On 6 and 9 August, the US dropped atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki followed by a Soviet invasion of Japanese-occupied Manchuria.
Japan announced its unconditional surrender on 15 August and signed a surrender document on 2 September 1945.
World War II transformed the political, economic, and social structures of the world, and established the foundation of international relations for the rest of the 20th century and into the 21st century.
The United Nations was created to foster international cooperation and prevent future conflicts, with the victorious great powers—China, France, the Soviet Union, the UK, and the US—becoming the permanent members of its Security Council.
The Soviet Union and the US emerged as rival superpowers, setting the stage for the Cold War.
In the wake of Europe's devastation, the influence of its great powers waned, triggering the decolonisation of Africa and of Asia.
Many countries whose industries had been damaged moved towards economic recovery and expansion.
Most historians agree that World War II began with the German invasion of Poland on 1 September 1939 and the British and French declarations of war on Germany two days later.
Dates for the beginning of the Pacific War include the start of the Second Sino-Japanese War on 7 July 1937, or the earlier Japanese invasion of Manchuria on 18 September 1931.
Other proposed starting dates include the Italian invasion of Abyssinia on 3 October 1935.
The British historian Antony Beevor views the beginning of World War II as the Battles of Khalkhin Gol fought between Japan and the forces of Mongolia and the Soviet Union from May to September 1939.
Others view the Spanish Civil War as the start or prelude to World War II.
The date of the war's end is also not universally agreed upon.
It was generally accepted at the time that the war ended with the armistice of 15 August 1945 (V-J Day), rather than with the formal surrender of Japan on 2 September 1945, which officially ended the war in Asia.
A peace treaty between Japan and the Allies was signed in 1951.
A 1990 treaty regarding Germany's future allowed the reunification of East and West Germany to take place.
No formal peace treaty between Japan and the Soviet Union was ever signed, although the state of war between the two countries was terminated by the Soviet–Japanese Joint Declaration of 1956, which also restored full diplomatic relations between them.
World War I radically altered the European political map.
The most prominent nations of the Central Powers each lost territory in their respective peace treaties at the conclusion of the conflict.
New nation-states were created out of the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian, Ottoman, and Russian Empires.
To prevent a future world war, the League of Nations was established in 1920 by the Paris Peace Conference.
The organisation's primary function was to prevent armed conflict through collective security, military, and naval disarmament, as well as settling international disputes through peaceful negotiations and arbitration.
Despite strong pacifist sentiment after World War I, irredentist and revanchist nationalism had emerged in several European states.
These sentiments were especially pronounced in Germany due to the significant territorial, colonial, and financial losses imposed by the Treaty of Versailles.
Under the treaty, Germany lost around 13 percent of its home territory and all its overseas possessions, while German annexation of other states was prohibited, reparations were imposed, and limits were placed on the size and capability of the country's armed forces.
The German Empire was dissolved in the German revolution of 1918–1919, and a democratic government, later known as the Weimar Republic, was created.
The interwar period saw strife between supporters of the new republic and hardline opponents on both the political right and left.
Italy, as an Entente ally, had made some post-war territorial gains; however, Italian nationalists were angered that the promises made by the United Kingdom and France to secure Italian entrance into the war were not fulfilled in the peace settlement.
From 1922 to 1925, the fascist movement led by Benito Mussolini seized power in Italy with a nationalist, totalitarian, and class collaborationist agenda that abolished representative democracy, repressed socialist, left-wing, and liberal forces, and pursued an aggressive expansionist foreign policy aimed at making Italy a world power, promising the creation of a "New Roman Empire".
Adolf Hitler, after an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the German government in 1923, eventually became the chancellor of Germany in 1933 when President Paul von Hindenburg and the Reichstag appointed him.
The Nazis soon abolished parliamentary democracy, espousing a radical, racially motivated revision of the world order, and began a massive rearmament campaign.
Following Hindenburg's death in 1934, Hitler proclaimed himself Führer of Germany.
France, seeking to secure its alliance with Italy, allowed Italy a free hand in Ethiopia, which Italy desired as a colonial possession.
The situation was aggravated in early 1935 when the Territory of the Saar Basin was legally reunited with Germany, and Hitler repudiated the Treaty of Versailles, accelerated his rearmament programme, and introduced conscription.
The United Kingdom, France and Italy formed the Stresa Front in April 1935 in order to contain Germany, a key step towards military globalisation; however, that June, the United Kingdom made an independent naval agreement with Germany, easing prior restrictions.
The Soviet Union, concerned by Germany's goals of capturing vast areas of Eastern Europe, drafted a treaty of mutual assistance with France.
Before taking effect, though, the Franco-Soviet pact was required to go through the bureaucracy of the League of Nations, which rendered it essentially toothless.
The United States, concerned with events in Europe and Asia, passed the Neutrality Act in August of the same year.
Hitler defied the Versailles and Locarno Treaties by remilitarising the Rhineland in March 1936, encountering little opposition due to the policy of appeasement.
In October 1936, Germany and Italy formed the Rome–Berlin Axis.
A month later, Germany and Japan signed the Anti-Comintern Pact, which Italy joined the following year.
The Kuomintang party in China launched a unification campaign against regional warlords and nominally unified China in the mid-1920s, but was soon embroiled in a civil war against its former Chinese Communist Party (CCP) allies and new regional warlords.
In 1931, an increasingly militaristic Empire of Japan, which had long sought influence in China as the first step of what its government saw as the country's right to rule Asia, staged the Mukden incident as a pretext to invade Manchuria and establish the puppet state of Manchukuo.
China appealed to the League of Nations to stop the Japanese invasion of Manchuria.
Japan withdrew from the League of Nations after being condemned for its incursion into Manchuria.
The two nations then fought several battles, in Shanghai, Rehe, and Hebei, until the Tanggu Truce was signed in 1933.
Thereafter, Chinese volunteer forces continued the resistance to Japanese aggression in Manchuria, and Chahar and Suiyuan.
After the 1936 Xi'an Incident, the Kuomintang and CCP forces agreed on a ceasefire to present a united front to oppose Japan.
The Second Italo-Ethiopian War was a colonial war that began in October 1935 and ended in May 1936.
The war began with the invasion of the Ethiopian Empire (also known as Abyssinia) by the armed forces of the Kingdom of Italy (Regno d'Italia), which was launched from Italian Somaliland and Eritrea.
The war resulted in the military occupation of Ethiopia and its annexation into the newly created colony of Italian East Africa (Africa Orientale Italiana); in addition it exposed the weakness of the League of Nations as a force to preserve peace.
Both Italy and Ethiopia were member nations, but the League did little when the former clearly violated Article X of the League's Covenant.
The United Kingdom and France supported imposing sanctions on Italy for the invasion, although the sanctions were not fully enforced and failed to end the Italian invasion.
Italy subsequently dropped its objections to Germany's goal of absorbing Austria.
When civil war broke out in Spain, Hitler and Mussolini lent military support to the Nationalist rebels, led by General Francisco Franco.
Italy supported the Nationalists to a greater extent than the Nazis: Mussolini sent more than 70,000 ground troops, 6,000 aviation personnel, and 720 aircraft to Spain.
The Soviet Union supported the existing government of the Spanish Republic.
More than 30,000 foreign volunteers, known as the International Brigades, also fought against the Nationalists.
Both Germany and the Soviet Union used this proxy war as an opportunity to test in combat their most advanced weapons and tactics.
The Nationalists won the civil war in April 1939; Franco, now dictator, remained officially neutral during World War II but generally favoured the Axis.
His largest collaboration with Germany was the sending of volunteers to fight on the Eastern Front.
In July 1937, Japan captured the former Chinese imperial capital of Peking after instigating the Marco Polo Bridge incident, which culminated in the Japanese campaign to invade all of China following years of tension and low-level conflicts.
The Soviets quickly signed a non-aggression pact with China to lend materiel support, effectively ending China's prior cooperation with Germany.
From September to November, the Japanese attacked Taiyuan, engaged the Kuomintang Army around Xinkou, fought Communist forces in Pingxingguan,Yang Kuisong, "On the reconstruction of the facts of the Battle of Pingxingguan" and wrestled control over China's northern railway network.
Nationalist Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek deployed his best army to defend Shanghai, but after three months of heavy fighting, Shanghai fell.
The Japanese continued to push Chinese forces back, capturing the capital Nanking in December 1937.
In March 1938, Nationalist Chinese forces won their first major victory at Taierzhuang, but ultimately lost control of the city of Xuzhou in May.
In June 1938, Chinese forces stalled the Japanese advance by flooding the Yellow River; buying time for the Chinese to prepare their defences at Wuhan at heavy cost to the local civilian population, but the city was taken by October after heavy fighting along the Yangtze River.
Japanese military victories did not destroy Chinese resistance; instead, the Chinese government relocated inland to Chongqing and continued the war.
Aiming to break Chinese morale, Japanese aircraft began striking cities in the Sichuan basin in a bombing campaign, killing tens of thousands of civilians.
In the mid-to-late 1930s, Japanese forces in Manchukuo had sporadic border clashes with the Soviet Union and Mongolia.
The Japanese doctrine of Hokushin-ron, which emphasised Japan's expansion northward, was favoured by the Imperial Army during this time.
This policy would prove difficult to maintain in light of the Japanese defeat at Khalkin Gol in 1939, the ongoing Second Sino-Japanese War and ally Nazi Germany pursuing neutrality with the Soviets.
Japan and the Soviet Union eventually signed a Neutrality Pact in April 1941, and Japan adopted the doctrine of Nanshin-ron, promoted by the Navy, which took its focus southward and eventually led to war with the United States and the Western Allies.
In Europe, Germany and Italy were becoming more aggressive.
In March 1938, Germany annexed Austria, again provoking little response from other European powers.
Encouraged, Hitler began pressing German claims on the Sudetenland, an area of Czechoslovakia with a predominantly ethnic German population.
Soon the United Kingdom and France followed the appeasement policy of British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain and conceded this territory to Germany in the Munich Agreement, which was made against the wishes of the Czechoslovak government, in exchange for a promise of no further territorial demands.
Soon afterwards, Germany and Italy forced Czechoslovakia to cede additional territory to Hungary, and Poland annexed the Trans-Olza region of Czechoslovakia.
Although all of Germany's stated demands had been satisfied by the agreement, privately Hitler was furious that British interference had prevented him from seizing all of Czechoslovakia in one operation.
In subsequent speeches Hitler attacked British and Jewish "war-mongers" and in January 1939 secretly ordered a major build-up of the German navy to challenge British naval supremacy.
In March 1939, Germany invaded the remainder of Czechoslovakia and subsequently split it into the German Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia and a pro-German client state, the Slovak Republic.
Hitler also delivered an ultimatum to Lithuania on 20 March 1939, forcing the concession of the Klaipėda Region, formerly the German Memelland.
Following further demands from Hitler regarding the Free City of Danzig and the Polish corridor, the United Kingdom and France guaranteed their support for Polish independence.
When Italy conquered Albania in April 1939, the same guarantee was extended to the Kingdoms of Romania and Greece.
Shortly after the Franco-British pledge to Poland, Germany and Italy formalised their own alliance with the Pact of Steel.
Hitler accused the United Kingdom and Poland of trying to encircle Germany and renounced the Anglo-German Naval Agreement and the German–Polish declaration of non-aggression.
The situation became a crisis in late August as Germany concentrated its forces near the Polish border.
On 23 August, the Soviet Union signed a non-aggression pact with Germany, after tripartite negotiations for a military alliance between France, the United Kingdom, and Soviet Union had stalled.
This pact had a secret protocol that defined German and Soviet spheres of influence: Lithuania for Germany; Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Bessarabia for the Soviet Union; and Poland to be partitioned between the two powers.
The pact ensured that Germany would not face a war with the Soviet Union when it invaded Poland.
Immediately afterwards, Hitler ordered the attack to proceed on 26 August, but upon hearing that the United Kingdom had concluded a formal mutual assistance pact with Poland and that Italy would maintain neutrality, he decided to delay it.
Germany offered Britain an alliance if Britain helped Germany gain Danzig, the Polish corridor and its former colonies, but Britain replied that it would honour its guarantee to Poland.
On 29 August, Hitler demanded that a Polish plenipotentiary travel to Berlin by the following day to negotiate a solution to the crisis, but Britain rejected the timeline as unreasonable.
On the night of 30–31 August, the British ambassador Nevile Henderson met German Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop.
Ribbentrop handed him Hitler's demands regarding Poland then announced that the deadline for Poland's acceptance had already passed.
On 1 September 1939, Germany invaded Poland after having staged several false flag border incidents as a pretext to initiate the invasion.
The first German attack of the war came against the Polish defences at Westerplatte.
The United Kingdom responded with an ultimatum for Germany to cease military operations, and on 3 September, after the ultimatum was ignored, Britain and France declared war on Germany.
During the Phoney War period, the alliance provided no direct military support to Poland, outside of a cautious French probe into the Saarland.
The Western Allies also began a naval blockade of Germany, which aimed to damage the country's economy and war effort.
Germany responded by ordering U-boat warfare against Allied merchant and warships, which would later escalate into the Battle of the Atlantic.
On 8 September, German troops reached the suburbs of Warsaw.
The Polish counter-offensive to the west halted the German advance for several days, but it was outflanked and encircled by the Wehrmacht.
Remnants of the Polish army broke through to besieged Warsaw.
On 17 September 1939, two days after signing a cease-fire with Japan, the Soviet Union invaded Poland under the supposed pretext that the Polish state had ceased to exist.
On 27 September, the Warsaw garrison surrendered to the Germans, and the last large operational unit of the Polish Army surrendered on 6 October.
Despite the military defeat, Poland never surrendered; instead, it formed the Polish government-in-exile and a clandestine state apparatus remained in occupied Poland.
A significant part of Polish military personnel evacuated to Romania and Latvia; many of them later fought against the Axis in other theatres of the war.
Germany annexed western Poland and occupied central Poland; the Soviet Union annexed eastern Poland.
Small shares of Polish territory were transferred to Lithuania and Slovakia.
On 6 October, Hitler made a public peace overture to the United Kingdom and France but said that the future of Poland was to be determined exclusively by Germany and the Soviet Union.
The proposal was rejected and Hitler ordered an immediate offensive against France, which was postponed until the spring of 1940 due to bad weather.
After the outbreak of war in Poland, Stalin threatened Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania with military invasion, forcing the three Baltic countries to sign pacts allowing the creation of Soviet military bases in these countries; in October 1939, significant Soviet military contingents were moved there.
Finland refused to sign a similar pact and rejected ceding part of its territory to the Soviet Union.
The Soviet Union invaded Finland in November 1939, and was subsequently expelled from the League of Nations for this crime of aggression.
Despite overwhelming numerical superiority, Soviet military success during the Winter War was modest, and the Finno–Soviet war ended in March 1940 with some Finnish concessions of territory.
In June 1940, the Soviet Union occupied the entire territories of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, as well as the Romanian regions of Bessarabia, Northern Bukovina, and the Hertsa region.
In August 1940, Hitler imposed the Second Vienna Award on Romania which led to the transfer of Northern Transylvania to Hungary.
In September 1940, Bulgaria demanded Southern Dobruja from Romania with German and Italian support, leading to the Treaty of Craiova.
The loss of one-third of Romania's 1939 territory caused a coup against King Carol II, turning Romania into a fascist dictatorship under Marshal Ion Antonescu, with a course set towards the Axis in the hopes of a German guarantee.
Meanwhile, German–Soviet political relations and economic co-operation gradually stalled, and both states began preparations for war.
In April 1940, Germany invaded Denmark and Norway to protect shipments of iron ore from Sweden, which the Allies were attempting to cut off.
Denmark capitulated after six hours, and despite Allied support, Norway was conquered within two months.
British discontent over the Norwegian campaign led to the resignation of Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain, who was replaced by Winston Churchill on 10 May 1940.
On the same day, Germany launched an offensive against France.
To circumvent the strong Maginot Line fortifications on the Franco-German border, Germany directed its attack at the neutral nations of Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg.
The Germans carried out a flanking manoeuvre through the Ardennes region, which was mistakenly perceived by the Allies as an impenetrable natural barrier against armoured vehicles.
By successfully implementing new Blitzkrieg tactics, the Wehrmacht rapidly advanced to the Channel and cut off the Allied forces in Belgium, trapping the bulk of the Allied armies in a cauldron on the Franco-Belgian border near Lille.
The United Kingdom was able to evacuate a significant number of Allied troops from the continent by early June, although they had to abandon almost all their equipment.
On 10 June, Italy invaded France, declaring war on both France and the United Kingdom.
The Germans turned south against the weakened French army, and Paris fell to them on 14 June.
Eight days later France signed an armistice with Germany; it was divided into German and Italian occupation zones, and an unoccupied rump state under the Vichy Regime, which, though officially neutral, was generally aligned with Germany.
France kept its fleet, which the United Kingdom attacked on 3 July in an attempt to prevent its seizure by Germany.
The air Battle of Britain began in early July with Luftwaffe attacks on shipping and harbours.
The German campaign for air superiority started in August but its failure to defeat RAF Fighter Command forced the indefinite postponement of the proposed German invasion of Britain.
The German strategic bombing offensive intensified with night attacks on London and other cities in the Blitz, but largely ended in May 1941 after failing to significantly disrupt the British war effort.
Using newly captured French ports, the German Navy enjoyed success against an over-extended Royal Navy, using U-boats against British shipping in the Atlantic.
The British Home Fleet scored a significant victory on 27 May 1941 by sinking the German battleship Bismarck.
In November 1939, the United States was assisting China and the Western Allies, and had amended the Neutrality Act to allow "cash and carry" purchases by the Allies.
In 1940, following the German capture of Paris, the size of the United States Navy was significantly increased.
In September the United States further agreed to a trade of American destroyers for British bases.
Still, a large majority of the American public continued to oppose any direct military intervention in the conflict well into 1941.
In December 1940, President Franklin D.
Roosevelt accused Hitler of planning world conquest and ruled out any negotiations as useless, calling for the United States to become an "arsenal of democracy" and promoting Lend-Lease programmes of military and humanitarian aid to support the British war effort; Lend-Lease was later extended to the other Allies, including the Soviet Union after it was invaded by Germany.
The United States started strategic planning to prepare for a full-scale offensive against Germany.
At the end of September 1940, the Tripartite Pact formally united Japan, Italy, and Germany as the Axis powers.
The Tripartite Pact stipulated that any country—with the exception of the Soviet Union—that attacked any Axis Power would be forced to go to war against all three.
The Axis expanded in November 1940 when Hungary, Slovakia, and Romania joined.
Romania and Hungary later made major contributions to the Axis war against the Soviet Union, in Romania's case partially to recapture territory ceded to the Soviet Union.
In early June 1940, the Italian Regia Aeronautica attacked and besieged Malta, a British possession.
From late summer to early autumn, Italy conquered British Somaliland and made an incursion into British-held Egypt.
In October, Italy attacked Greece, but the attack was repulsed with heavy Italian casualties; the campaign ended within months with minor territorial changes.
To assist Italy and prevent Britain from gaining a foothold, Germany prepared to invade the Balkans, which would threaten Romanian oil fields and strike against British dominance of the Mediterranean.
In December 1940, British Empire forces began counter-offensives against Italian forces in Egypt and Italian East Africa.
The offensives were successful; by early February 1941, Italy had lost control of eastern Libya, and large numbers of Italian troops had been taken prisoner.
The Italian Navy also suffered significant defeats, with the Royal Navy putting three Italian battleships out of commission after a carrier attack at Taranto, and neutralising several more warships at the Battle of Cape Matapan.
Italian defeats prompted Germany to deploy an expeditionary force to North Africa; at the end of March 1941, Erwin Rommel's Afrika Korps launched an offensive which drove back Commonwealth forces.
In less than a month, Axis forces advanced to western Egypt and besieged the port of Tobruk.
By late March 1941, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia signed the Tripartite Pact; however, the Yugoslav government was overthrown two days later by pro-British nationalists.
Germany and Italy responded with simultaneous invasions of both Yugoslavia and Greece, commencing on 6 April 1941 with a massive bombing of Belgrade; both nations were forced to surrender within the month.
The airborne invasion of the Greek island of Crete at the end of May completed the German conquest of the Balkans.
Partisan warfare subsequently broke out against the Axis occupation of Yugoslavia, which continued until the end of the war.
In the Middle East in May, Commonwealth forces quashed an uprising in Iraq which had been supported by German aircraft from bases within Vichy-controlled Syria.
Between June and July, British-led forces invaded and occupied the French possessions of Syria and Lebanon, assisted by the Free French.
With the situation in Europe and Asia relatively stable, Germany, Japan, and the Soviet Union made preparations for war.
With the Soviets wary of mounting tensions with Germany, and the Japanese planning to take advantage of the European War by seizing resource-rich European possessions in Southeast Asia, the two powers signed the Soviet–Japanese Neutrality Pact in April 1941.
By contrast, the Germans were steadily making preparations for an attack on the Soviet Union, massing forces on the Soviet border.
Hitler believed that the United Kingdom's refusal to end the war was based on the hope that the United States and the Soviet Union would enter the war against Germany.
On 31 July 1940, Hitler decided that the Soviet Union should be eliminated and aimed for the conquest of Ukraine, the Baltic states and Byelorussia.
However, other senior German officials like Ribbentrop saw an opportunity to create a Euro-Asian bloc against the British Empire by inviting the Soviet Union into the Tripartite Pact.
In November 1940, negotiations took place to determine if the Soviet Union would join the pact.
The Soviets showed some interest but asked for concessions from Finland, Bulgaria, Turkey, and Japan that Germany considered unacceptable.
On 18 December 1940, Hitler issued the directive to prepare for an invasion of the Soviet Union.
On 22 June 1941, Germany, supported by Italy and Romania, invaded the Soviet Union in Operation Barbarossa, with Germany accusing the Soviets of plotting against them; they were joined shortly by Finland and Hungary.
The primary targets of this surprise offensive were the Baltic region, Moscow and Ukraine, with the ultimate goal of ending the 1941 campaign near the Arkhangelsk–Astrakhan line—from the Caspian to the White Seas.
Hitler's objectives were to eliminate the Soviet Union as a military power, exterminate communism, generate Lebensraum ("living space") by dispossessing the native population, and guarantee access to the strategic resources needed to defeat Germany's remaining rivals.
Although the Red Army was preparing for strategic counter-offensives before the war, Operation Barbarossa forced the Soviet supreme command to adopt strategic defence.
During the summer, the Axis made significant gains into Soviet territory, inflicting immense losses in both personnel and materiel, mainly in massive encirclements around Minsk, Smolensk, and Uman.
Nazi policy entailed that Wehrmacht subject Soviet POWs to murderous treatment, executing all Jewish and Communist POWs immediately per the Commissar Order, and subjecting the remainder to forced marches to open-air concentration camps, where they were to be deliberately starved to death.
By the end of the winter of 1941, 2.
By mid-August, however, the German Army High Command decided to suspend the offensive of a considerably depleted Army Group Centre, and to divert the 2nd Panzer Group to reinforce troops advancing towards central Ukraine and Leningrad.
The Kiev offensive was overwhelmingly successful, resulting in encirclement and elimination of four Soviet armies, and made possible further advance into Crimea and industrially-developed eastern Ukraine (the First Battle of Kharkov).
The diversion of three-quarters of the Axis troops and the majority of their air forces from France and the central Mediterranean to the Eastern Front prompted the United Kingdom to reconsider its grand strategy.
In July, the UK and the Soviet Union formed a military alliance against Germany and in August, the United Kingdom and the United States jointly issued the Atlantic Charter, which outlined British and American goals for the post-war world.
In late August the British and Soviets invaded neutral Iran to secure the Persian Corridor, Iran's oil fields, and preempt any Axis advances through Iran toward the Baku oil fields or India.
By October, Axis powers had achieved operational objectives in Ukraine and the Baltic region, with only the sieges of Leningrad and Sevastopol continuing.
A major offensive against Moscow was renewed; after two months of fierce battles in increasingly harsh weather, the German army almost reached the outer suburbs of Moscow, where the exhausted troops were forced to suspend the offensive.
Large territorial gains were made by Axis forces, but their campaign had failed to achieve its main objectives: two key cities remained in Soviet hands, the Soviet capability to resist was not broken, and the Soviet Union retained a considerable part of its military potential.
The blitzkrieg phase of the war in Europe had ended.
By early December, freshly mobilised reserves allowed the Soviets to achieve numerical parity with Axis troops.
This, as well as intelligence data which established that a minimal number of Soviet troops in the East would be sufficient to deter any attack by the Japanese Kwantung Army, allowed the Soviets to begin a massive counter-offensive that started on 5 December all along the front and pushed German troops 100–250 kilometres (62–155 mi) west.
Following the Japanese false flag Mukden incident in 1931, the Japanese shelling of the American gunboat USS Panay in 1937, and the 1937–1938 Nanjing Massacre, Japanese-American relations deteriorated.
In 1939, the United States notified Japan that it would not be extending its trade treaty and American public opinion opposing Japanese expansionism led to a series of economic sanctions—the Export Control Acts—which banned US exports of chemicals, minerals and military parts to Japan, and increased economic pressure on the Japanese regime.
During 1939 Japan launched its first attack against Changsha, but was repulsed by late September.
Despite several offensives by both sides, by 1940 the war between China and Japan was at a stalemate.
To increase pressure on China by blocking supply routes, and to better position Japanese forces in the event of a war with the Western powers, Japan invaded and occupied northern Indochina in September 1940.
Chinese nationalist forces launched a large-scale counter-offensive in early 1940.
In August, Chinese communists launched an offensive in Central China; in retaliation, Japanese armies in North China implemented the Three Alls Policy, a massive scorched earth initiative to depopulate regions deemed hostile to Japanese occupation.
Continued antipathy between Chinese communist and nationalist forces culminated in armed clashes in January 1941, effectively ending their co-operation.
In March, the Japanese 11th army attacked the headquarters of the nationalist Chinese 19th army but was repulsed during the Battle of Shanggao.
In September, Japan attempted to take the city of Changsha again and clashed with Chinese nationalist forces.
German successes in Europe prompted Japan to increase pressure on European governments in Southeast Asia.
The Dutch government agreed to provide Japan with oil supplies from the Dutch East Indies, but negotiations for additional access to their resources ended in failure in June 1941.
In July 1941 Japan sent troops to southern Indochina, threatening British and Dutch possessions in the Far East.
The United States, the United Kingdom, and other Western governments reacted to this move with a freeze on Japanese assets and a total oil embargo.
At the same time, Japan was planning an invasion of the Soviet Far East, intending to take advantage of the German invasion in the west, but abandoned the operation after the sanctions.
Since early 1941, the United States and Japan had been engaged in negotiations in an attempt to improve their strained relations and end the war in China.
Japan advanced a number of proposals which were dismissed by the Americans as inadequate.
At the same time the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands engaged in secret discussions for the joint defence of their territories, in the event of a Japanese attack against any of them.
Roosevelt reinforced the Philippines (an American protectorate scheduled for independence in 1946) and warned Japan that the United States would react to Japanese attacks against any "neighboring countries".
Frustrated at the lack of progress and pressured by American–British–Dutch sanctions, especially in oil, Japan prepared for war.
Emperor Hirohito, after initial hesitation about Japan's chances of victory, began to favour Japan's entry into the war.
As a result, Prime Minister Fumimaro Konoe resigned.
Hirohito refused the recommendation to appoint Prince Naruhiko Higashikuni in his place, choosing War Minister Hideki Tojo instead.
On 3 November, Nagano explained in detail the plan of the attack on Pearl Harbor to the Emperor.
On 5 November, Hirohito approved in imperial conference the operations plan for the war.
On 20 November, the new government presented an interim proposal as its final offer.
It called for the end of American aid to China and for lifting the embargo on the supply of oil and other resources to Japan.
In exchange, Japan promised not to launch any attacks in Southeast Asia and to withdraw its forces from southern Indochina.
The American counter-proposal of 26 November required that Japan evacuate all of China without conditions and conclude non-aggression pacts with all Pacific powers.
That meant Japan was essentially forced to choose between abandoning its ambitions in China, or seizing the natural resources it needed in the Dutch East Indies by force; the Japanese military did not consider the former an option, and many officers considered the oil embargo an unspoken declaration of war.
Japan planned to seize European colonies in Asia to create a large defensive perimeter stretching into the Central Pacific.
The Japanese would then be free to exploit the resources of Southeast Asia while exhausting the over-stretched Allies by fighting a defensive war.
To prevent American intervention while securing the perimeter, it was further planned to neutralise the United States Pacific Fleet and the American military presence in the Philippines from the outset.
On 7 December 1941 (8 December in Asian time zones), Japan attacked British and American holdings with near-simultaneous offensives against Southeast Asia and the Central Pacific.
These included an attack on the American fleets at Pearl Harbor and the Philippines, as well as invasions of Guam, Wake Island, Malaya, Thailand, and Hong Kong.
These attacks led the United States, United Kingdom, China, Australia, and several other states to formally declare war on Japan, whereas the Soviet Union, being heavily involved in large-scale hostilities with European Axis countries, maintained its neutrality agreement with Japan.
Germany, followed by the other Axis states, declared war on the United States in solidarity with Japan, citing as justification the American attacks on German war vessels that had been ordered by Roosevelt.
On 1 January 1942, the Allied Big Four—the Soviet Union, China, the United Kingdom, and the United States—and 22 smaller or exiled governments issued the Declaration by United Nations, thereby affirming the Atlantic Charter and agreeing not to sign a separate peace with the Axis powers.
During 1942, Allied officials debated on the appropriate grand strategy to pursue.
All agreed that defeating Germany was the primary objective.
The Americans favoured a straightforward, large-scale attack on Germany through France.
The Soviets demanded a second front.
The British argued that military operations should target peripheral areas to wear out German strength, leading to increasing demoralisation, and bolstering resistance forces; Germany itself would be subject to a heavy bombing campaign.
An offensive against Germany would then be launched primarily by Allied armour, without using large-scale armies.
Eventually, the British persuaded the Americans that a landing in France was infeasible in 1942 and they should instead focus on driving the Axis out of North Africa.
At the Casablanca Conference in early 1943, the Allies reiterated the statements issued in the 1942 Declaration and demanded the unconditional surrender of their enemies.
The British and Americans agreed to continue to press the initiative in the Mediterranean by invading Sicily to fully secure the Mediterranean supply routes.
Although the British argued for further operations in the Balkans to bring Turkey into the war, in May 1943, the Americans extracted a British commitment to limit Allied operations in the Mediterranean to an invasion of the Italian mainland, and to invade France in 1944.
Japanese forces achieved naval victories in the South China Sea, Java Sea, and Indian Ocean, and bombed the Allied naval base at Darwin, Australia.
On 16 April, 7,000 British soldiers were encircled by the Japanese 33rd Division during the Battle of Yenangyaung in Burma and rescued by the Chinese 38th Division.
Despite stubborn resistance by Filipino and US forces, the Philippine Commonwealth was eventually captured in May, forcing its government into exile.
Following the capture of Bataan, Japanese armies forced some 75,000 Filipino and American prisoners on a 42km death march, resulting in thousands of deaths.
By the end of April, Japan and its ally Thailand had conquered Malaya, the Dutch East Indies, Singapore, Rabaul and most of Burma, inflicting severe losses on Allied troops and taking a large number of prisoners.
Japanese advances were accompanied by numerous atrocities, including the Sook Ching Massacre in Singapore.
The only Allied success against Japan was a Chinese victory at Changsha.
The Japanese victories left it overconfident and overextended.
In early May 1942, Japan initiated operations to capture Port Moresby by amphibious assault and thus sever communications and supply lines between the United States and Australia.
The planned invasion was thwarted when an Allied task force, centred on two American fleet carriers, fought Japanese naval forces to a draw in the Battle of the Coral Sea.
Japan's next plan, motivated by the earlier Doolittle Raid, was to seize Midway Atoll and lure American carriers into battle to be eliminated; as a diversion, Japan would also send forces to occupy the Aleutian Islands in Alaska.
In mid-May, Japan started the Zhejiang-Jiangxi campaign in China, with the goal of inflicting retribution on the Chinese who aided the surviving American airmen in the Doolittle Raid by destroying Chinese air bases and fighting against the Chinese 23rd and 32nd Army Groups.
In early June, Japan put its operations into action, but the Americans had broken Japanese naval codes in late May and were fully aware of the plans and order of battle, and used this knowledge to achieve a decisive victory at Midway over the Imperial Japanese Navy.
With its capacity for aggressive action greatly diminished as a result of the Midway battle, Japan attempted to capture Port Moresby by an overland campaign in the Territory of Papua.
The Americans planned a counterattack against Japanese positions in the southern Solomon Islands, primarily Guadalcanal, as a first step towards capturing Rabaul, the main Japanese base in Southeast Asia.
Both plans started in July, but by mid-September, the Battle for Guadalcanal took priority for the Japanese, and troops in New Guinea were ordered to withdraw from the Port Moresby area to the northern part of the island, where they faced Australian and United States troops in the Battle of Buna–Gona.
Guadalcanal soon became a focal point for both sides with heavy commitments of troops and ships in the battle for Guadalcanal, with Japanese forces suffering massive losses in the attrition, especially amongst their elite pilots.
By the start of 1943, the Japanese were defeated on the island and withdrew their troops.
In Burma, Commonwealth forces mounted two operations.
The first was a disastrous offensive into the Arakan region in late 1942 that forced a retreat back to India by May 1943.
The second was the insertion of irregular forces behind Japanese frontlines in February which, by the end of April, had achieved mixed results.
Despite considerable losses, in early 1942 Germany and its allies stopped a major Soviet offensive in central and southern Russia, keeping most territorial gains they had achieved during the previous year.
In May, the Germans defeated Soviet offensives in the Kerch Peninsula and at Kharkov.
The fortress city of Sevastopol, which the Red Army had held out against Axis siege for nearly 250 days, was finally seized with the use of massive artillery bombardments and poison gas.
In June 1942 Germany launched its main summer offensive against southern Russia, to seize the oil fields of the Caucasus and occupy the Kuban steppe, while maintaining positions on the northern and central areas of the front.
The Germans split Army Group South into two groups: Army Group A advanced to the lower Don River and struck south-east to the Caucasus, while Army Group B headed towards the Volga River.
The Soviet Union decided to make its stand at Stalingrad on the Volga.
By mid-November, the Germans had nearly taken Stalingrad in bitter street fighting.
The Soviet Union began its second winter counter-offensive, starting with an encirclement of the German Sixth Army at Stalingrad, and an assault on the Rzhev salient near Moscow, though the latter failed.
By early February 1943, the German army had taken tremendous losses; German troops at Stalingrad had been defeated, and the front-line had been pushed back beyond its position before the summer offensive.
In mid-February, after the Soviet push had tapered off, the Germans launched another attack on Kharkov, creating a salient in their front line around the Soviet city of Kursk.
Exploiting poor American naval command decisions, the German navy ravaged Allied shipping off the American Atlantic coast.
By November 1941, Commonwealth forces had launched a counter-offensive in North Africa, Operation Crusader, and reclaimed all the gains the Germans and Italians had made.
The Germans also launched a North African offensive in January, pushing the British back to positions at the Gazala line by early February, followed by a temporary lull in combat which Germany used to prepare for their upcoming offensives.
Concerns that the Japanese might use bases in Vichy-held Madagascar caused the British to invade the island in early May 1942.
An Axis offensive in Libya forced an Allied retreat deep inside Egypt until Axis forces were stopped at El Alamein.
On the Continent, raids of Allied commandos on strategic targets, culminating in the failed Dieppe Raid, demonstrated the Western Allies' inability to launch an invasion of continental Europe without much better preparation, equipment, and operational security.
In August 1942, the Allies succeeded in repelling a second attack against El Alamein and, at a high cost, managed to deliver desperately needed supplies to the besieged Malta.
A few months later, the Allies commenced an attack of their own in Egypt, dislodging the Axis forces and beginning a drive west across Libya.
This attack was followed up shortly after by Anglo-American landings in French North Africa, which resulted in the region joining the Allies.
Hitler responded to the French colony's defection by ordering the occupation of Vichy France; although Vichy forces did not resist this violation of the armistice, they managed to scuttle their fleet to prevent its capture by German forces.
Axis forces in Africa withdrew into Tunisia, which was conquered by the Allies in May 1943.
In June 1943, the British and Americans began a strategic bombing campaign against Germany with a goal to disrupt the war economy, reduce morale, and "de-house" the civilian population.
The firebombing of Hamburg was among the first attacks in this campaign, inflicting significant casualties and considerable losses on infrastructure of this important industrial centre.
After the Guadalcanal campaign, the Allies initiated several operations against Japan in the Pacific.
In May 1943, Canadian and US forces were sent to eliminate Japanese forces from the Aleutians.
Soon after, the United States, with support from Australia, New Zealand and Pacific Islander forces, began major ground, sea and air operations to isolate Rabaul by capturing surrounding islands, and breach the Japanese Central Pacific perimeter at the Gilbert and Marshall Islands.
By the end of March 1944, the Allies had completed both of these objectives and had also neutralised the major Japanese base at Truk in the Caroline Islands.
In April, the Allies launched an operation to retake Western New Guinea.
In the Soviet Union, both the Germans and the Soviets spent the spring and early summer of 1943 preparing for large offensives in central Russia.
On 5 July 1943, Germany attacked Soviet forces around the Kursk Bulge.
Within a week, German forces had exhausted themselves against the Soviets' well-constructed defences, and for the first time in the war, Hitler cancelled an operation before it had achieved tactical or operational success.
This decision was partially affected by the Western Allies' invasion of Sicily launched on 9 July, which, combined with previous Italian failures, resulted in the ousting and arrest of Mussolini later that month.
On 12 July 1943, the Soviets launched their own counter-offensives, thereby nearly completely dispelling any chance of German victory or even stalemate in the east.
The Soviet victory at Kursk marked the end of German superiority, giving the Soviet Union the initiative on the Eastern Front.
The Germans tried to stabilise their eastern front along the hastily fortified Panther–Wotan line, but the Soviets broke through it at Smolensk and the Lower Dnieper Offensive.
On 3 September 1943, the Western Allies invaded the Italian mainland, following Italy's armistice with the Allies and the ensuing German occupation of Italy.
Germany, with the help of local fascists, responded to the armistice by disarming Italian forces that were in many places without superior orders, seizing military control of Italian areas, and creating a series of defensive lines.
German special forces then rescued Mussolini, who then soon established a new client state in German-occupied Italy named the Italian Social Republic, causing an Italian civil war.
The Western Allies fought through several lines until reaching the main German defensive line in mid-November.
German operations in the Atlantic also suffered.
By May 1943, as Allied counter-measures became increasingly effective, the resulting sizeable German submarine losses forced a temporary halt of the German Atlantic naval campaign.
In November 1943, Franklin D.
Roosevelt and Winston Churchill met with Chiang Kai-shek in Cairo and then with Joseph Stalin in Tehran.
The former conference determined the post-war return of Japanese territory and the military planning for the Burma campaign, while the latter included agreement that the Western Allies would invade Europe in 1944 and that the Soviet Union would declare war on Japan within three months of Germany's defeat.
From November 1943, during the seven-week Battle of Changde, the Chinese awaited Allied relief as they forced Japan to fight a costly war of attrition.
In January 1944, the Allies launched a series of attacks in Italy against the line at Monte Cassino and tried to outflank it with landings at Anzio.
On 27 January 1944, Soviet troops launched a major offensive that expelled German forces from the Leningrad region, thereby ending the most lethal siege in history.
The following Soviet offensive was halted on the pre-war Estonian border by the German Army Group North aided by Estonians hoping to re-establish national independence.
This delay slowed subsequent Soviet operations in the Baltic Sea region.
By late May 1944, the Soviets had liberated Crimea, largely expelled Axis forces from Ukraine, and made incursions into Romania, which were repulsed by the Axis troops.
The Allied offensives in Italy had succeeded and, at the cost of allowing several German divisions to retreat, Rome was captured on 4 June.
The Allies had mixed success in mainland Asia.
In March 1944, the Japanese launched the first of two invasions, an operation against Allied positions in Assam, India, and soon besieged Commonwealth positions at Imphal and Kohima.
In May 1944, British and Indian forces mounted a counter-offensive that drove Japanese troops back to Burma by July, and Chinese forces that had invaded northern Burma in late 1943 besieged Japanese troops in Myitkyina.
The second Japanese invasion of China aimed to destroy China's main fighting forces, secure railways between Japanese-held territory and capture Allied airfields.
By June, the Japanese had conquered the province of Henan and begun a new attack on Changsha.
On 6 June 1944 (commonly known as D-Day), after three years of Soviet pressure, the Western Allies invaded northern France.
After reassigning several Allied divisions from Italy, they also attacked southern France.
These landings were successful and led to the defeat of the German Army units in France.
Paris was liberated on 25 August by the local resistance assisted by the Free French Forces, both led by General Charles de Gaulle, and the Western Allies continued to push back German forces in western Europe during the latter part of the year.
An attempt to advance into northern Germany spearheaded by a major airborne operation in the Netherlands failed.
After that, the Western Allies slowly pushed into Germany, but failed to cross the Roer river.
In Italy, the Allied advance slowed due to the last major German defensive line.
On 22 June, the Soviets launched a strategic offensive in Belarus that nearly destroyed the German Army Group Centre.
Soon after that, another Soviet strategic offensive forced German troops from Western Ukraine and Eastern Poland.
The Soviet Red Army however halted in the Praga district on the other side of the Vistula as the Germans quelled the Warsaw Uprising initiated by the Home Army (the main faction of the Polish resistance, loyal to the non-communist government-in exile), killing over 150,000 Poles.
The national uprising in Slovakia was also quelled by the Germans.
The Soviet Red Army's strategic offensive in eastern Romania cut off and destroyed the considerable German troops there and triggered a successful coup d'état in Romania and in Bulgaria, followed by those countries' shift to the Allied side.
In September 1944, Soviet troops advanced into Yugoslavia and forced the rapid withdrawal of German Army Groups E and F in Greece, Albania, and Yugoslavia to rescue them from being cut off.
By this point, the communist-led Partisans under Marshal Josip Broz Tito, who had led an increasingly successful guerrilla campaign against the occupation since 1941, controlled much of the territory of Yugoslavia and engaged in delaying efforts against German forces further south.
In northern Serbia, the Soviet Red Army, with limited support from Bulgarian forces, assisted the Partisans in a joint liberation of the capital city of Belgrade on 20 October.
A few days later, the Soviets launched a massive assault against German-occupied Hungary that lasted until the fall of Budapest in February 1945.
Unlike rapid Soviet victories in the Balkans, bitter Finnish resistance to the Soviet offensive in the Karelian Isthmus denied the Soviets occupation of Finland and led to a Soviet-Finnish armistice on relatively mild conditions, although Finland was obligated to fight their German former allies.
By the start of July 1944, Commonwealth forces in Southeast Asia had repelled the Japanese sieges in Assam, pushing the Japanese back to the Chindwin River while the Chinese captured Myitkyina.
In September 1944, Chinese forces captured Mount Song and reopened the Burma Road.
In China, the Japanese had more successes, having finally captured Changsha in mid-June and the city of Hengyang by early August.
Soon after, they invaded the province of Guangxi, winning major engagements against Chinese forces at Guilin and Liuzhou by the end of November and successfully linking up their forces in China and Indochina by mid-December.
In the Pacific, US forces continued to push back the Japanese perimeter.
In mid-June 1944, they began their offensive against the Mariana and Palau islands and decisively defeated Japanese forces in the Battle of the Philippine Sea.
These defeats led to the resignation of the Japanese Prime Minister, Hideki Tojo, and provided the United States with air bases to launch intensive heavy bomber attacks on the Japanese home islands.
In late October, American forces invaded the Filipino island of Leyte; soon after, Allied naval forces scored another large victory in the Battle of Leyte Gulf, one of the largest naval battles in history.
On 16 December 1944, Germany made a last attempt to split the Allies on the Western Front by using most of its remaining reserves to launch a massive counter-offensive in the Ardennes and along the French-German border, hoping to encircle large portions of Western Allied troops and prompt a political settlement after capturing their primary supply port at Antwerp.
By 16 January 1945, this offensive had been repulsed with no strategic objectives fulfilled.
In Italy, the Western Allies remained stalemated at the German defensive line.
In mid-January 1945, the Red Army attacked in Poland, pushing from the Vistula to the Oder river in Germany, and overran East Prussia.
On 4 February Soviet, British, and US leaders met for the Yalta Conference.
They agreed on the occupation of post-war Germany, and on when the Soviet Union would join the war against Japan.
In February, the Soviets entered Silesia and Pomerania, while the Western Allies entered western Germany and closed to the Rhine river.
By March, the Western Allies crossed the Rhine north and south of the Ruhr, encircling the German Army Group B.
In early March, in an attempt to protect its last oil reserves in Hungary and retake Budapest, Germany launched its last major offensive against Soviet troops near Lake Balaton.
Within two weeks, the offensive had been repulsed, the Soviets advanced to Vienna, and captured the city.
In early April, Soviet troops captured Königsberg, while the Western Allies finally pushed forward in Italy and swept across western Germany capturing Hamburg and Nuremberg.
American and Soviet forces met at the Elbe river on 25 April, leaving unoccupied pockets in southern Germany and around Berlin.
Soviet troops stormed and captured Berlin in late April.
In Italy, German forces surrendered on 29 April, while the Italian Social Republic capitulated two days later.
On 30 April, the Reichstag was captured, signalling the military defeat of Nazi Germany.
Major changes in leadership occurred on both sides during this period.
On 12 April, President Roosevelt died and was succeeded by his vice president, Harry S.
Benito Mussolini was killed by Italian partisans on 28 April.
On 30 April, Hitler committed suicide in his headquarters, and was succeeded by Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz (as President of the Reich) and Joseph Goebbels (as Chancellor of the Reich).
Goebbels also committed suicide on the following day and was replaced by Lutz Graf Schwerin von Krosigk, in what would later be known as the Flensburg Government.
Total and unconditional surrender in Europe was signed on 7 and 8 May, to be effective by the end of 8 May.
German Army Group Centre resisted in Prague until 11 May.
On 23 May, all remaining members of the German government were arrested by Allied forces in Flensburg.
On 5 June, all German political and military institutions were placed under Allied control through the Berlin Declaration.
In the Pacific theatre, American forces accompanied by the forces of the Philippine Commonwealth advanced in the Philippines, clearing Leyte by the end of April 1945.
They landed on Luzon in January 1945 and recaptured Manila in March, during which Japanese forces killed 100,000 Filipino civilians in the city.
Fighting continued on Luzon, Mindanao, and other islands of the Philippines until the end of the war.
Meanwhile, the United States Army Air Forces launched a massive firebombing campaign of strategic cities in Japan in an effort to destroy Japanese war industry and civilian morale.
A devastating bombing raid on Tokyo of 9–10 March was the deadliest conventional bombing raid in history.
In May 1945, Australian troops landed in Borneo, overrunning the oilfields there.
British, American, and Chinese forces defeated the Japanese in northern Burma in March, and the British pushed on to reach Rangoon by 3 May.
Chinese forces started a counterattack in the Battle of West Hunan that occurred between 6 April and 7 June 1945.
American naval and amphibious forces also moved towards Japan, taking Iwo Jima by March, and Okinawa by the end of June.
At the same time, a naval blockade by submarines was strangling Japan's economy and drastically reducing its ability to supply overseas forces.
On 11 July, Allied leaders met in Potsdam, Germany.
They confirmed earlier agreements about Germany, and the American, British and Chinese governments reiterated the demand for unconditional surrender of Japan, specifically stating that "the alternative for Japan is prompt and utter destruction".
During this conference, the United Kingdom held its general election, and Clement Attlee replaced Churchill as Prime Minister.
The call for unconditional surrender was rejected by the Japanese government, which believed it would be capable of negotiating for more favourable surrender terms.
In early August, the United States dropped atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Between the two bombings, the Soviets, pursuant to the Yalta agreement, declared war on Japan, invaded Japanese-held Manchuria and quickly defeated the Kwantung Army, which was the largest Japanese fighting force.
These two events persuaded previously adamant Imperial Army leaders to accept surrender terms.
The Red Army also captured the southern part of Sakhalin Island and the Kuril Islands.
On the night of 9–10 August 1945, Emperor Hirohito ordered the Japanese cabinet to accept the terms demanded by the Allies in the Potsdam Declaration.
On 15 August, the Emperor communicated this decision to the Japanese people through a speech broadcast on the radio (Gyokuon-hōsō, literally "broadcast in the Emperor's voice").
On 15 August 1945, Japan surrendered, with the surrender documents finally signed at Tokyo Bay on the deck of the American battleship USS Missouri on 2 September 1945, ending the war.
The Allies established occupation administrations in Austria and Germany, both of which were initially divided between western and eastern occupation zones controlled by the Western Allies and the Soviet Union, respectively.
However, their paths soon diverged.
In Germany, the western and eastern occupation zones officially ended in 1949, with the respective zones becoming separate countries, West Germany and East Germany.
In Austria, however, occupation continued until 1955, when a joint settlement between the Western Allies and the Soviet Union permitted the reunification of Austria as a democratic state officially non-aligned with any political bloc (although in practice having better relations with the Western Allies).
A denazification program in Germany led to the prosecution of Nazi war criminals in the Nuremberg trials and the removal of ex-Nazis from power, although this policy moved towards amnesty and re-integration of ex-Nazis into West German society.
Germany lost a quarter of its pre-war (1937) territory.
Among the eastern territories, Silesia, Neumark and most of Pomerania were taken over by Poland, and East Prussia was divided between Poland and the Soviet Union, followed by the expulsion to Germany of the nine million Germans from these provinces, as well as three million Germans from the Sudetenland in Czechoslovakia.
By the 1950s, one-fifth of West Germans were refugees from the east.
The Soviet Union also took over the Polish provinces east of the Curzon Line, from which two million Poles were expelled.
Northeastern Romania, parts of eastern Finland, and the Baltic states were annexed into the Soviet Union.
Italy lost its monarchy, colonial empire, and some European territories.
In an effort to maintain world peace, the Allies formed the United Nations, which officially came into existence on 24 October 1945, and adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 as a common standard for all member nations.
The great powers that were the victors of the war—France, China, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and the United States—became the permanent members of the UN's Security Council.
The five permanent members remain so to the present, although there have been two seat changes, between the Republic of China and the People's Republic of China in 1971, and between the Soviet Union and its successor state, the Russian Federation, following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991.
The alliance between the Western Allies and the Soviet Union had begun to deteriorate even before the war was over.
Besides Germany, the rest of Europe was also divided into Western and Soviet spheres of influence.
Most eastern and central European countries fell into the Soviet sphere, which led to the establishment of Communist-led regimes, with full or partial support of the Soviet occupation authorities.
As a result, East Germany, Poland, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, and Albania became Soviet satellite states.
Communist Yugoslavia conducted a fully independent policy, causing tension with the Soviet Union.
A communist uprising in Greece was put down with Anglo-American support and the country remained aligned with the West.
Post-war division of the world was formalised by two international military alliances, the United States-led NATO and the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact.
The long period of political tensions and military competition between them—the Cold War—would be accompanied by an unprecedented arms race and a number of proxy wars throughout the world.
In Asia, the United States led the occupation of Japan and administered Japan's former islands in the Western Pacific, while the Soviets annexed South Sakhalin and the Kuril Islands.
Korea, formerly under Japanese colonial rule, was divided and occupied by the Soviet Union in the North and the United States in the South between 1945 and 1948.
Separate republics emerged on both sides of the 38th parallel in 1948, each claiming to be the legitimate government for all of Korea, which led ultimately to the Korean War.
In China, nationalist and communist forces resumed the civil war in June 1946.
Communist forces prevailed and established the People's Republic of China on the mainland, while nationalist forces retreated to Taiwan in 1949.
In the Middle East, the Arab rejection of the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine and the creation of Israel marked the escalation of the Arab–Israeli conflict.
While European powers attempted to retain some or all of their colonial empires, their losses of prestige and resources during the war rendered this unsuccessful, leading to decolonisation.
The global economy suffered heavily from the war, although participating nations were affected differently.
The United States emerged much richer than any other nation, leading to a baby boom, and by 1950 its gross domestic product per person was much greater than that of any of the other powers, and it dominated the world economy.
The Allied occupational authorities pursued a policy of industrial disarmament in Western Germany from 1945 to 1948.
Due to international trade interdependencies, this policy led to an economic stagnation in Europe and delayed European recovery from the war for several years.
At the Bretton Woods Conference in July 1944, the Allied nations drew up an economic framework for the post-war world.
The agreement created the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), which later became part of the World Bank Group.
The Bretton Woods system lasted until 1973.
Recovery began with the mid-1948 currency reform in West Germany, and was sped up by the liberalisation of European economic policy that the US Marshall Plan economic aid (1948–1951) both directly and indirectly caused.
The post-1948 West German recovery has been called the German economic miracle.
Italy also experienced an economic boom and the French economy rebounded.
By contrast, the United Kingdom was in a state of economic ruin, and although receiving a quarter of the total Marshall Plan assistance, more than any other European country, it continued in relative economic decline for decades.
The Soviet Union, despite enormous human and material losses, also experienced rapid increases in production in the immediate post-war era, having seized and transferred most of Germany's industrial plants and exacted war reparations from its satellite states.
Japan recovered much later.
China returned to its pre-war industrial production by 1952.
An estimated 60 million to more than 75 million people died in the war including at least 20 million who died from deprivation, famine and disease.
Civilian deaths have been estimated to comprise 67% to 80% of all direct and indirect deaths from the war.
The Soviet Union had the highest overall death toll (estimated at 20 million to 28 million), followed by China (at least 15 million), Germany (6 million to 8.
The countries which sustained the most military deaths were the Soviet Union (about 8.
Of the 20 million to 25 million military deaths in the war, the majority were of German and Soviet soldiers, including prisoners of war (POWs), on the Eastern Front.
The high civilian death toll relative to military deaths was unusual for major wars up to that time.
Some 10 million to 15 million people died of starvation and disease in China and the Soviet Union, and 8 million to 10 million in India and under Japanese occupation elsewhere in Asia and the Pacific.
Around 15 million civilians died in genocides and other deliberate killings, while millions in total died in concentration camps, aerial bombings and in combat zones.
In trials following the war, representatives of the Axis powers and their accomplices were convicted of numerous war crimes, crimes against humanity and complicity in genocides.
The Nazis killed about 6 million Jews in a racially motivated genocide known as the Holocaust.
They also killed millions of Slavs, over 130 thousand Romani, and members of other groups that they considered racially inferior.
Almost 300,000 people with mental and physical disabilities were also systematically killed in Germany and its occupied territories.
The killing of civilians and POWs through massacres and deliberate starvation was especially common in the Eastern European and Asia-Pacific theatres.
German forces on the Eastern Front destroyed or confiscated available food, massacred civilians in reprisals and routinely shot prisoners.
The Japanese killed millions of civilians in occupied areas through massacres and scorched earth strategies; for example, in their "kill all, burn all, loot all" policy in China.
In the Nanking Massacre, between 40,000 and 200,000 Chinese civilians and POWs were killed.
Japan also used biological weapons in China and in early conflicts against the Soviets.
The Soviet Union was responsible for imprisoning, deporting and often executing hundreds of thousands of civilians and POWs from occupied or annexed territories.
This included the Katyn massacre of 22,000 Polish officers and intellectuals.
War crimes were also committed in civil wars and conflicts between resistance groups in occupied territories.
In Yugoslavia, numerous war crimes, including the massacre of civilians and prisoners, were committed by Axis forces and the Axis-aligned Croatian Ustaše.
The main resistance groups, the Serbian-Nationalist Chetniks and the Communist-led partisans, also committed massacres and persecutions of their enemies.
In Poland, about 100,000 Poles were killed by the Ukrainian Insurgent Army in the Volhynia massacres between 1943 and 1945.
About 10,000 Ukrainians were killed by Poles in reprisal attacks.
In Greece, Axis forces were mainly responsible for civilian deaths through deliberate starvation and reprisal massacres, although the major resistance forces, ELAS and EDES, also committed war crimes.
The Soviet Union, Japan and Germany inflicted high death rates on POWs through executions, starvation, forced labour and other mistreatment.
The Soviet Union and Japan had not ratified the Geneva Convention on treatment of POWs, and Germany regarded itself as exempt from the convention on the Eastern Front.
About a third of those taken prisoner by the Japanese died, as did almost 60 per cent of Soviet prisoners of the Germans.
About a third of Germans taken prisoner by the Soviet Union died in captivity.
The mortality rate of German and Japanese prisoners of the Western allies was 1 to 2 per cent.
Germany, Japan and the Soviet Union made extensive use of forced labour of foreign civilians and POWs.
In greater Germany, there were 7.
Those civilians and POWs from Soviet-occupied territories who were deported to the Soviet Union were usually imprisoned in the Soviet forced labour camps, known as the gulag.
Between 200,000 and one million Soviet POWs and civilians repatriated from German camps were also sent to the gulag as alleged Axis collaborators where many died from malnutrition, the harsh climate and overwork.
The Japanese conscripted millions of foreign civilians and POWs to undertake forced labour in Japan and its occupied territories where they suffered harsh treatment and high death rates.
Up to 200,000 Korean and Chinese women were forced into sex slavery.
While troops of all the major belligerents committed rapes, the rape of civilians was particularly widespread among the German, Japanese and Soviet military.
The post-war international military tribunals found the evidence of rape by German forces "overwhelming".
Twenty-nine Japanese defendants, mostly generals, were convicted of complicity in mass rape.
Soviet soldiers also committed mass rapes in occupied territories, especially Germany.
War crimes were committed by the Western Allied powers, but not on the same scale as those of the Axis powers and the Soviet Union.
The Western Allies prosecuted a number of war crimes committed by their own forces, but Allied war crimes were not prosecuted by the post-war international military tribunals.
There has been continued debate over whether the area bombing of cities in Germany and Japan, and the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, were war crimes.
In Europe, occupation came under two forms.
In Western, Northern, and Central Europe (France, Norway, Denmark, the Low Countries, and the annexed portions of Czechoslovakia) Germany established economic policies through which it collected roughly 69.
Thus, the income from occupied nations was over 40 percent of the income Germany collected from taxation, a figure which increased to nearly 40 percent of total German income as the war went on.
In the East, the intended gains of Lebensraum were never attained as fluctuating front-lines and Soviet scorched earth policies denied resources to the German invaders.
Unlike in the West, the Nazi racial policy encouraged extreme brutality against what it considered to be the "inferior people" of Slavic descent; most German advances were thus followed by mass atrocities and war crimes.
The Nazis killed an estimated 2.
Although by 1942 resistance groups formed in most occupied territories, the assessments of the effectiveness of Soviet partisans and French Resistance suggests that they did not significantly hamper German operations until late 1943.
In Asia, Japan termed nations under its occupation as being part of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, essentially a Japanese hegemony which it claimed was for purposes of liberating colonised peoples.
Although Japanese forces were sometimes welcomed as liberators from European domination, Japanese war crimes frequently turned local public opinion against them.
During Japan's initial conquest, it captured 4,000,000 barrels (640,000 m3) of oil (~550,000 tonnes) left behind by retreating Allied forces; and by 1943, was able to get production in the Dutch East Indies up to 50 million barrels (7,900,000 m3) of oil (~6.
In the 1930s, Britain and the United States together controlled almost 75% of world mineral output—essential for projecting military power.
In Europe, before the outbreak of the war, the Allies had significant advantages in both population and economics.
In 1938, the Western Allies (United Kingdom, France, Poland and the British Dominions) had a 30 percent larger population and a 30 percent higher gross domestic product than the European Axis powers (Germany and Italy); including colonies, the Allies had more than a 5:1 advantage in population and a nearly 2:1 advantage in GDP.
In Asia at the same time, China had roughly six times the population of Japan but only an 89 percent higher GDP; this reduces to three times the population and only a 38 percent higher GDP if Japanese colonies are included.
The United States produced about two-thirds of all munitions used by the Allies in World War II, including warships, transports, warplanes, artillery, tanks, trucks, and ammunition.
Although the Allies' economic and population advantages were largely mitigated during the initial rapid blitzkrieg attacks of Germany and Japan, they became the decisive factor by 1942, after the United States and Soviet Union joined the Allies and the war evolved into one of attrition.
While the Allies' ability to out-produce the Axis was partly due to more access to natural resources, other factors, such as Germany and Japan's reluctance to employ women in the labour force, Allied strategic bombing, and Germany's late shift to a war economy contributed significantly.
Additionally, neither Germany nor Japan planned to fight a protracted war, and had not equipped themselves to do so.
Germany, Japan and the Soviet Union used millions of slave labourers in war-related industries.
Aircraft were used for reconnaissance, as fighters, bombers, and ground-support, and each role developed considerably.
Innovations included airlift (the capability to quickly move limited high-priority supplies, equipment, and personnel); and strategic bombing (the bombing of enemy industrial and population centres to destroy the enemy's ability to wage war).
Anti-aircraft weaponry also advanced, including defences such as radar and surface-to-air artillery, in particular the introduction of the proximity fuze.
The use of the jet aircraft was pioneered and led to jets becoming standard in air forces worldwide.
Advances were made in nearly every aspect of naval warfare, most notably with aircraft carriers and submarines.
Although aeronautical warfare had relatively little success at the start of the war, actions at Taranto, Pearl Harbor, and the Coral Sea established the carrier as the dominant capital ship (in place of the battleship).
In the Atlantic, escort carriers became a vital part of Allied convoys, increasing the effective protection radius and helping to close the Mid-Atlantic gap.
Carriers were also more economical than battleships due to the relatively low cost of aircraft and because they are not required to be as heavily armoured.
Submarines, which had proved to be an effective weapon during the First World War, were expected by all combatants to be important in the second.
The British focused development on anti-submarine weaponry and tactics, such as sonar and convoys, while Germany focused on improving its offensive capability, with designs such as the Type VII submarine and wolfpack tactics.
Gradually, improving Allied technologies such as the Leigh Light, Hedgehog, Squid, and homing torpedoes proved effective against German submarines.
Land warfare changed from the static frontlines of trench warfare of World War I, which had relied on improved artillery that outmatched the speed of both infantry and cavalry, to increased mobility and combined arms.
The tank, which had been used predominantly for infantry support in the First World War, had evolved into the primary weapon.
In the late 1930s, tank design was considerably more advanced than it had been during World War I, and advances continued throughout the war with increases in speed, armour and firepower.
At the start of the war, most commanders thought enemy tanks should be met by tanks with superior specifications.
This idea was challenged by the poor performance of the relatively light early tank guns against armour, and German doctrine of avoiding tank-versus-tank combat.
This, along with Germany's use of combined arms, were among the key elements of their highly successful blitzkrieg tactics across Poland and France.
Many means of destroying tanks, including indirect artillery, anti-tank guns (both towed and self-propelled), mines, short-ranged infantry antitank weapons, and other tanks were used.
Even with large-scale mechanisation, infantry remained the backbone of all forces, and throughout the war, most infantry were equipped similarly to World War I.
The portable machine gun spread, a notable example being the German MG 34, and various submachine guns which were suited to close combat in urban and jungle settings.
The assault rifle, a late war development incorporating many features of the rifle and submachine gun, became the standard post-war infantry weapon for most armed forces.
Most major belligerents attempted to solve the problems of complexity and security involved in using large codebooks for cryptography by designing ciphering machines, the most well-known being the German Enigma machine.
Development of SIGINT (signals intelligence) and cryptanalysis enabled the countering process of decryption.
Notable examples were the Allied decryption of Japanese naval codes and British Ultra, a pioneering method for decoding Enigma that benefited from information given to the United Kingdom by the Polish Cipher Bureau, which had been decoding early versions of Enigma before the war.
Another component of military intelligence was deception, which the Allies used to great effect in operations such as Mincemeat and Bodyguard.
Other technological and engineering feats achieved during, or as a result of, the war include the world's first programmable computers (Z3, Colossus, and ENIAC), guided missiles and modern rockets, the Manhattan Project's development of nuclear weapons, operations research, the development of artificial harbours, and oil pipelines under the English Channel.
Although penicillin was discovered before the war, the development of industrial production technology as well as the mass production and use began during the war.
Buchanan, Andrew (7 February 2023).
Past & Present (258): 246–281.
Gerlach, Christian (2024).
Conditions of Violence.
Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG.
ISBN 978-3-1115-6873-7.
West Point Maps of the European War.
Archived 23 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine.
West Point Maps of the Asian-Pacific War.
Archived 23 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine.
The history of science covers the development of science from ancient times to the present.
It encompasses all three major branches of science: natural, social, and formal.
Protoscience, early sciences, and natural philosophies such as alchemy and astrology that existed during the Bronze Age, Iron Age, classical antiquity and the Middle Ages, declined after the emergence of modern sciences during the Scientific Revolution.
The earliest roots of scientific thinking and practice can be traced to Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia during the 3rd and 2nd millennia BCE.
These civilizations' contributions to mathematics, astronomy, and medicine influenced later Greek natural philosophy of classical antiquity, wherein formal attempts were made to provide explanations of events in the physical world based on natural causes.
After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, knowledge of Greek conceptions of the world deteriorated in Latin-speaking Western Europe during the early centuries (400 to 1000 CE) of the Middle Ages, but continued to thrive in the Greek-speaking Byzantine Empire.
Aided by translations of Greek texts, the Hellenistic worldview was preserved and absorbed into the Arabic-speaking Muslim world during the Islamic Golden Age.
The recovery and assimilation of Greek works and Islamic inquiries into Western Europe from the 10th to 13th century revived the learning of natural philosophy in the West.
Traditions of early science were also developed in ancient India and separately in ancient China, the Chinese model having influenced Vietnam, Korea and Japan before Western exploration.
Among the Pre-Columbian peoples of Mesoamerica, the Zapotec civilization established their first known traditions of astronomy and mathematics for producing calendars, followed by other civilizations such as the Maya.
Natural philosophy was transformed by the Scientific Revolution that transpired during the 16th and 17th centuries in Europe, as new ideas and discoveries departed from previous Greek conceptions and traditions.
The New Science that emerged was more mechanistic in its worldview, more integrated with mathematics, and more reliable and open as its knowledge was based on a newly defined scientific method.
More "revolutions" in subsequent centuries soon followed.
The chemical revolution of the 18th century, for instance, introduced new quantitative methods and measurements for chemistry.
In the 19th century, new perspectives regarding the conservation of energy, age of Earth, and evolution came into focus.
And in the 20th century, new discoveries in genetics and physics laid the foundations for new sub disciplines such as molecular biology and particle physics.
Moreover, industrial and military concerns as well as the increasing complexity of new research endeavors ushered in the era of "big science," particularly after World War II.
The nature of the history of science - including both the definition of science and whether the English word "science" is a misleading term for pre-modern scholarship as well as non-scholarly knowledge of the natural world - is a topic of ongoing debate and sometimes significant friction between scientists, sociologists and historians.
Alfred Edward Taylor has characterised lean periods in the advance of scientific discovery as "periodical bankruptcies of science".
The professionalization of the history of science in the 20th century was accompanied by a prodigious and proliferating specialization, with the field seeming to strive to match the protean diversity of modern science itself.
Science is a human activity, and scientific contributions have come from people from a wide range of different backgrounds and cultures.
Historians of science increasingly see their field as part of a global history of exchange, conflict and collaboration.
The relationship between science and religion has been variously characterized in terms of "conflict", "harmony", "complexity", and "mutual independence", among others.
Events in Europe such as the Galileo affair of the early 17th century led scholars such as John William Draper to postulate (c.
The "conflict thesis" has since lost favor among the majority of contemporary scientists and historians of science.
However, some contemporary philosophers and scientists, such as Richard Dawkins, still subscribe to this thesis.
Historians have emphasized that trust is necessary for agreement on claims about nature.
In this light, the 1660 establishment of the Royal Society and its code of experiment – trustworthy because witnessed by its members – has become an important chapter in the history of science.
Many people in modern history (typically women and persons of color) were excluded from elite scientific communities and characterized by the science establishment as inferior.
Historians in the 1980s and 1990s described the structural barriers to participation and began to recover the contributions of overlooked individuals.
Historians have also investigated the mundane practices of science such as fieldwork and specimen collection, correspondence, drawing, record-keeping, and the use of laboratory and field equipment.
In prehistoric times, knowledge and technique were passed from generation to generation in an oral tradition.
For instance, the domestication of maize for agriculture has been dated to about 9,000 years ago in southern Mexico, before the development of writing systems.
Similarly, archaeological evidence indicates the development of astronomical knowledge in preliterate societies.
The oral tradition of preliterate societies had several features, the first of which was its fluidity.
New information was constantly absorbed and adjusted to new circumstances or community needs.
There were no archives or reports.
This fluidity was closely related to the practical need to explain and justify a present state of affairs.
Another feature was the tendency to describe the universe as just sky and earth, with a potential underworld.
They were also prone to identify causes with beginnings, thereby providing a historical origin with an explanation.
There was also a reliance on a "medicine man" or "wise woman" for healing, knowledge of divine or demonic causes of diseases, and in more extreme cases, for rituals such as exorcism, divination, songs, and incantations.
Finally, there was an inclination to unquestioningly accept explanations that might be deemed implausible in more modern times while at the same time not being aware that such credulous behaviors could have posed problems.
The development of writing enabled humans to store and communicate knowledge across generations with much greater accuracy.
Its invention was a prerequisite for the development of philosophy and later science in ancient times.
Moreover, the extent to which philosophy and science would flourish in ancient times depended on the efficiency of a writing system (e.
The earliest roots of science can be traced to the Ancient Near East and North East Africa c.
Archaeological evidence has suggested that the Ancient Egyptian counting system had origins in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Also, fractal geometry designs which are widespread among Sub-Saharan African cultures are also found in Egyptian architecture and cosmological signs.
The Ishango bone, according to scholar Alexander Marshack, may have influenced the later development of mathematics in Egypt as, like some entries on the Ishango bone, Egyptian arithmetic also made use of multiplication by 2; this however, is disputed.
Megalithic structures located in Nabta Playa, Upper Egypt featured astronomy, calendar arrangements in alignment with the heliacal rising of Sirius and supported calibration the yearly calendar for the annual Nile flood.
These practices have been linked with the emergence of cosmology in Old Kingdom Egypt.
Their development of geometry was itself a necessary development of surveying to preserve the layout and ownership of farmland, which was flooded annually by the Nile.
The 3-4-5 right triangle and other rules of geometry were used to build rectilinear structures, and the post and lintel architecture of Egypt.
Egypt was also a center of alchemy research for much of the Mediterranean.
According to the medical papyri (written c.
Thus, in addition to medicine, therapies included prayer, incantation, and ritual.
The Ebers Papyrus, written c.
The Edwin Smith Papyrus, written at about the same time, contains a surgical manual for treating wounds, fractures, and dislocations.
The Egyptians believed that the effectiveness of their medicines depended on the preparation and administration under appropriate rituals.
Medical historians believe that ancient Egyptian pharmacology, for example, was largely ineffective.
Both the Ebers and Edwin Smith papyri applied the following components to the treatment of disease: examination, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis, which display strong parallels to the basic empirical method of science and, according to G.
Lloyd, played a significant role in the development of this methodology.
The ancient Egyptians even developed an official calendar that contained twelve months, thirty days each, and five days at the end of the year.
Unlike the Babylonian calendar or the ones used in Greek city-states at the time, the official Egyptian calendar was much simpler as it was fixed and did not take lunar and solar cycles into consideration.
Nubian mummies studied in the 1990s revealed that Kush was a pioneer of early antibiotics.
Tetracycline was being used by Nubians, based on bone remains between 350 AD and 550 AD.
The antibiotic was in wide commercial use only in the mid 20th century.
The theory states that earthen jars containing grain used for making beer contained the bacterium streptomyces, which produced tetracycline.
Although Nubians were not aware of tetracycline, they could have noticed that people fared better by drinking beer than just consuming the grain itself.
According to Charlie Bamforth, a professor of biochemistry and brewing science at the University of California, Davis, "They must have consumed it because it was rather tastier than the grain from which it was derived.
Based on engraved plans of Meroitic King Amanikhabali's pyramids, Nubians had a sophisticated understanding of mathematics as they appreciated the harmonic ratio.
The engraved plans are indicative of much to be revealed about Nubian mathematics.
The ancient Nubians also established a system of geometry which they used in creating early versions of sun clocks.
During the Meroitic period in Nubian history, the Nubians used a trigonometric methodology similar to the Egyptians.
The ancient Mesopotamians had extensive knowledge about the chemical properties of clay, sand, metal ore, bitumen, stone, and other natural materials, and applied this knowledge to practical use in manufacturing pottery, faience, glass, soap, metals, lime plaster, and waterproofing.
Metallurgy required knowledge about the properties of metals.
Nonetheless, the Mesopotamians seem to have had little interest in gathering information about the natural world for the mere sake of gathering information and were far more interested in studying the manner in which the gods had ordered the universe.
Biology of non-human organisms was generally only written about in the context of mainstream academic disciplines.
Animal physiology was studied extensively for the purpose of divination; the anatomy of the liver, which was seen as an important organ in haruspicy, was studied in particularly intensive detail.
Animal behavior was also studied for divinatory purposes.
Most information about the training and domestication of animals was probably transmitted orally without being written down, but one text dealing with the training of horses has survived.
The ancient Mesopotamians had no distinction between "rational science" and magic.
When a person became ill, doctors prescribed magical formulas to be recited as well as medicinal treatments.
The earliest medical prescriptions appear in Sumerian during the Third Dynasty of Ur (c.
The most extensive Babylonian medical text, however, is the Diagnostic Handbook written by the ummânū, or chief scholar, Esagil-kin-apli of Borsippa, during the reign of the Babylonian king Adad-apla-iddina (1069–1046 BCE).
In East Semitic cultures, the main medicinal authority was a kind of exorcist-healer known as an āšipu.
The profession was generally passed down from father to son and was held in extremely high regard.
Of less frequent recourse was another kind of healer known as an asu, who corresponds more closely to a modern physician and treated physical symptoms using primarily folk remedies composed of various herbs, animal products, and minerals, as well as potions, enemas, and ointments or poultices.
These physicians, who could be either male or female, also dressed wounds, set limbs, and performed simple surgeries.
The ancient Mesopotamians also practiced prophylaxis and took measures to prevent the spread of disease.
In Babylonian astronomy, records of the motions of the stars, planets, and the moon are left on thousands of clay tablets created by scribes.
Even today, astronomical periods identified by Mesopotamian proto-scientists are still widely used in Western calendars such as the solar year and the lunar month.
Using this data, they developed mathematical methods to compute the changing length of daylight in the course of the year, predict the appearances and disappearances of the Moon and planets, and eclipses of the Sun and Moon.
Only a few astronomers' names are known, such as that of Kidinnu, a Chaldean astronomer and mathematician.
Kiddinu's value for the solar year is in use for today's calendars.
Babylonian astronomy was "the first and highly successful attempt at giving a refined mathematical description of astronomical phenomena.
Aaboe, "all subsequent varieties of scientific astronomy, in the Hellenistic world, in India, in Islam, and in the West—if not indeed all subsequent endeavour in the exact sciences—depend upon Babylonian astronomy in decisive and fundamental ways.
To the Babylonians and other Near Eastern cultures, messages from the gods or omens were concealed in all natural phenomena that could be deciphered and interpreted by those who are adept.
Hence, it was believed that the gods could speak through all terrestrial objects (e.
Moreover, Babylonian astrology was inseparable from Babylonian astronomy.
The Mesopotamian cuneiform tablet Plimpton 322, dating to the 18th century BCE, records a number of Pythagorean triplets (3, 4, 5) and (5, 12, 13) .
Mathematical achievements from Mesopotamia had some influence on the development of mathematics in India, and there were confirmed transmissions of mathematical ideas between India and China, which were bidirectional.
Nevertheless, the mathematical and scientific achievements in India and particularly in China occurred largely independently from those of Europe and the confirmed early influences that these two civilizations had on the development of science in Europe in the pre-modern era were indirect, with Mesopotamia and later the Islamic World acting as intermediaries.
The arrival of modern science, which grew out of the Scientific Revolution, in India and China and the greater Asian region in general can be traced to the scientific activities of Jesuit missionaries who were interested in studying the region's flora and fauna during the 16th to 17th century.
The earliest traces of mathematical knowledge in the Indian subcontinent appear with the Indus Valley Civilisation (c.
The people of this civilization made bricks whose dimensions were in the proportion 4:2:1, which is favorable for the stability of a brick structure.
They also tried to standardize measurement of length to a high degree of accuracy.
They designed a ruler—the Mohenjo-daro ruler—whose length of approximately 1.
Bricks manufactured in ancient Mohenjo-daro often had dimensions that were integral multiples of this unit of length.
The Bakhshali manuscript contains problems involving arithmetic, algebra and geometry, including mensuration.
The topics covered include fractions, square roots, arithmetic and geometric progressions, solutions of simple equations, simultaneous linear equations, quadratic equations and indeterminate equations of the second degree.
In the 3rd century BCE, Pingala presents the Pingala-sutras, the earliest known treatise on Sanskrit prosody.
He also presents a numerical system by adding one to the sum of place values.
Pingala's work also includes material related to the Fibonacci numbers, called mātrāmeru.
Indian astronomer and mathematician Aryabhata (476–550), in his Aryabhatiya (499) introduced the sine function in trigonometry and the number 0.
In 628, Brahmagupta suggested that gravity was a force of attraction.
He also lucidly explained the use of zero as both a placeholder and a decimal digit, along with the Hindu–Arabic numeral system now used universally throughout the world.
Arabic translations of the two astronomers' texts were soon available in the Islamic world, introducing what would become Arabic numerals to the Islamic world by the 9th century.
Narayana Pandita (1340–1400) was an Indian mathematician.
Plofker writes that his texts were the most significant Sanskrit mathematics treatises after those of Bhaskara II, other than the Kerala school.
He wrote the Ganita Kaumudi (lit.
The work anticipated many developments in combinatorics.
Between the 14th and 16th centuries, the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics made significant advances in astronomy and especially mathematics, including fields such as trigonometry and analysis.
In particular, Madhava of Sangamagrama led advancement in analysis by providing the infinite and taylor series expansion of some trigonometric functions and pi approximation.
Parameshvara (1380–1460), presents a case of the Mean Value theorem in his commentaries on Govindasvāmi and Bhāskara II.
The Yuktibhāṣā was written by Jyeshtadeva in 1530.
The first textual mention of astronomical concepts comes from the Vedas, religious literature of India.
According to Sarma (2008): "One finds in the Rigveda intelligent speculations about the genesis of the universe from nonexistence, the configuration of the universe, the spherical self-supporting earth, and the year of 360 days divided into 12 equal parts of 30 days each with a periodical intercalary month.
The first 12 chapters of the Siddhanta Shiromani, written by Bhāskara in the 12th century, cover topics such as: mean longitudes of the planets; true longitudes of the planets; the three problems of diurnal rotation; syzygies; lunar eclipses; solar eclipses; latitudes of the planets; risings and settings; the moon's crescent; conjunctions of the planets with each other; conjunctions of the planets with the fixed stars; and the patas of the sun and moon.
The 13 chapters of the second part cover the nature of the sphere, as well as significant astronomical and trigonometric calculations based on it.
In the Tantrasangraha treatise, Nilakantha Somayaji's updated the Aryabhatan model for the interior planets, Mercury, and Venus and the equation that he specified for the center of these planets was more accurate than the ones in European or Islamic astronomy until the time of Johannes Kepler in the 17th century.
Jai Singh II of Jaipur constructed five observatories called Jantar Mantars in total, in New Delhi, Jaipur, Ujjain, Mathura and Varanasi; they were completed between 1724 and 1735.
Some of the earliest linguistic activities can be found in Iron Age India (1st millennium BCE) with the analysis of Sanskrit for the purpose of the correct recitation and interpretation of Vedic texts.
The most notable grammarian of Sanskrit was Pāṇini (c.
Inherent in his analytic approach are the concepts of the phoneme, the morpheme and the root.
The Tolkāppiyam text, composed in the early centuries of the common era, is a comprehensive text on Tamil grammar, which includes sutras on orthography, phonology, etymology, morphology, semantics, prosody, sentence structure and the significance of context in language.
Findings from Neolithic graveyards in what is now Pakistan show evidence of proto-dentistry among an early farming culture.
The ancient text Suśrutasamhitā of Suśruta describes procedures on various forms of surgery, including rhinoplasty, the repair of torn ear lobes, perineal lithotomy, cataract surgery, and several other excisions and other surgical procedures.
The Charaka Samhita of Charaka describes ancient theories on human body, etiology, symptomology and therapeutics for a wide range of diseases.
It also includes sections on the importance of diet, hygiene, prevention, medical education, and the teamwork of a physician, nurse and patient necessary for recovery to health.
An ancient Indian treatise on statecraft, economic policy and military strategy by Kautilya and Viṣhṇugupta, who are traditionally identified with Chāṇakya (c.
In this treatise, the behaviors and relationships of the people, the King, the State, the Government Superintendents, Courtiers, Enemies, Invaders, and Corporations are analyzed and documented.
Roger Boesche describes the Arthaśāstra as "a book of political realism, a book analyzing how the political world does work and not very often stating how it ought to work, a book that frequently discloses to a king what calculating and sometimes brutal measures he must carry out to preserve the state and the common good.
The development of Indian logic dates back to the Chandahsutra of Pingala and anviksiki of Medhatithi Gautama (c.
Indian logic stands as one of the three original traditions of logic, alongside the Greek and the Chinese logic.
The Indian tradition continued to develop through early to modern times, in the form of the Navya-Nyāya school of logic.
In the 2nd century, the Buddhist philosopher Nagarjuna refined the Catuskoti form of logic.
The Catuskoti is also often glossed Tetralemma (Greek) which is the name for a largely comparable, but not equatable, 'four corner argument' within the tradition of Classical logic.
Navya-Nyāya developed a sophisticated language and conceptual scheme that allowed it to raise, analyse, and solve problems in logic and epistemology.
It systematised all the Nyāya concepts into four main categories: sense or perception (pratyakşa), inference (anumāna), comparison or similarity (upamāna), and testimony (sound or word; śabda).
From the earliest the Chinese used a positional decimal system on counting boards in order to calculate.
To express 10, a single rod is placed in the second box from the right.
The spoken language uses a similar system to English: e.
No symbol was used for zero.
By the 1st century BCE, negative numbers and decimal fractions were in use and The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art included methods for extracting higher order roots by Horner's method and solving linear equations and by Pythagoras' theorem.
Cubic equations were solved in the Tang dynasty and solutions of equations of order higher than 3 appeared in print in 1245 CE by Ch'in Chiu-shao.
Pascal's triangle for binomial coefficients was described around 1100 by Jia Xian.
Although the first attempts at an axiomatization of geometry appear in the Mohist canon in 330 BCE, Liu Hui developed algebraic methods in geometry in the 3rd century CE and also calculated pi to 5 significant figures.
Astronomical observations from China constitute the longest continuous sequence from any civilization and include records of sunspots (112 records from 364 BCE), supernovas (1054), lunar and solar eclipses.
By the 12th century, they could reasonably accurately make predictions of eclipses, but the knowledge of this was lost during the Ming dynasty, so that the Jesuit Matteo Ricci gained much favor in 1601 by his predictions.
By 635 Chinese astronomers had observed that the tails of comets always point away from the sun.
From antiquity, the Chinese used an equatorial system for describing the skies and a star map from 940 was drawn using a cylindrical (Mercator) projection.
The use of an armillary sphere is recorded from the 4th century BCE and a sphere permanently mounted in equatorial axis from 52 BCE.
In 125 CE Zhang Heng used water power to rotate the sphere in real time.
This included rings for the meridian and ecliptic.
By 1270 they had incorporated the principles of the Arab torquetum.
In the Song Empire (960–1279) of Imperial China, Chinese scholar-officials unearthed, studied, and cataloged ancient artifacts.
To better prepare for calamities, Zhang Heng invented a seismometer in 132 CE which provided instant alert to authorities in the capital Luoyang that an earthquake had occurred in a location indicated by a specific cardinal or ordinal direction.
Although no tremors could be felt in the capital when Zhang told the court that an earthquake had just occurred in the northwest, a message came soon afterwards that an earthquake had indeed struck 400 to 500 km (250 to 310 mi) northwest of Luoyang (in what is now modern Gansu).
Zhang called his device the 'instrument for measuring the seasonal winds and the movements of the Earth' (Houfeng didong yi 候风地动仪), so-named because he and others thought that earthquakes were most likely caused by the enormous compression of trapped air.
There are many notable contributors to early Chinese disciplines, inventions, and practices throughout the ages.
One of the best examples would be the medieval Song Chinese Shen Kuo (1031–1095), a polymath and statesman who was the first to describe the magnetic-needle compass used for navigation, discovered the concept of true north, improved the design of the astronomical gnomon, armillary sphere, sight tube, and clepsydra, and described the use of drydocks to repair boats.
After observing the natural process of the inundation of silt and the find of marine fossils in the Taihang Mountains (hundreds of miles from the Pacific Ocean), Shen Kuo devised a theory of land formation, or geomorphology.
He also adopted a theory of gradual climate change in regions over time, after observing petrified bamboo found underground at Yan'an, Shaanxi.
If not for Shen Kuo's writing, the architectural works of Yu Hao would be little known, along with the inventor of movable type printing, Bi Sheng (990–1051).
Shen's contemporary Su Song (1020–1101) was also a brilliant polymath, an astronomer who created a celestial atlas of star maps, wrote a treatise related to botany, zoology, mineralogy, and metallurgy, and had erected a large astronomical clocktower in Kaifeng city in 1088.
To operate the crowning armillary sphere, his clocktower featured an escapement mechanism and the world's oldest known use of an endless power-transmitting chain drive.
The Jesuit China missions of the 16th and 17th centuries "learned to appreciate the scientific achievements of this ancient culture and made them known in Europe.
Through their correspondence European scientists first learned about the Chinese science and culture.
Among the technological accomplishments of China were, according to the British scholar Needham, the water-powered celestial globe (Zhang Heng), dry docks, sliding calipers, the double-action piston pump, the blast furnace, the multi-tube seed drill, the wheelbarrow, the suspension bridge, the winnowing machine, gunpowder, the raised-relief map, toilet paper, the efficient harness, along with contributions in logic, astronomy, medicine, and other fields.
However, cultural factors prevented these Chinese achievements from developing into "modern science".
It was not that there was no order in nature for the Chinese, but rather that it was not an order ordained by a rational personal being, and hence there was no conviction that rational personal beings would be able to spell out in their lesser earthly languages the divine code of laws which he had decreed aforetime.
The Taoists, indeed, would have scorned such an idea as being too naïve for the subtlety and complexity of the universe as they intuited it.
During the Middle Formative Period (c.
Following a period of initial urban development in the Preclassical period, the Classic Maya civilization (c.
The Maya developed a positional numeral system with a base of 20 that included the use of zero for constructing their calendars.
Maya writing, which was developed by 200 BCE, widespread by 100 BCE, and rooted in Olmec and Zapotec scripts, contains easily discernible calendar dates in the form of logographs representing numbers, coefficients, and calendar periods amounting to 20 days and even 20 years for tracking social, religious, political, and economic events in 360-day years.
The contributions of the Ancient Egyptians and Mesopotamians in the areas of astronomy, mathematics, and medicine had entered and shaped Greek natural philosophy of classical antiquity, whereby formal attempts were made to provide explanations of events in the physical world based on natural causes.
Inquiries were also aimed at such practical goals such as establishing a reliable calendar or determining how to cure a variety of illnesses.
The ancient people who were considered the first scientists may have thought of themselves as natural philosophers, as practitioners of a skilled profession (for example, physicians), or as followers of a religious tradition (for example, temple healers).
The earliest Greek philosophers, known as the pre-Socratics, provided competing answers to the question found in the myths of their neighbors: "How did the ordered cosmos in which we live come to be?
For example, that land floats on water and that earthquakes are caused by the agitation of the water upon which the land floats, rather than the god Poseidon.
Thales' student Pythagoras of Samos founded the Pythagorean school, which investigated mathematics for its own sake, and was the first to postulate that the Earth is spherical in shape.
Leucippus (5th century BCE) introduced atomism, the theory that all matter is made of indivisible, imperishable units called atoms.
This was greatly expanded on by his pupil Democritus and later Epicurus.
Plato and Aristotle produced the first systematic discussions of natural philosophy, which did much to shape later investigations of nature.
Their development of deductive reasoning was of particular importance and usefulness to later scientific inquiry.
Plato founded the Platonic Academy in 387 BCE, whose motto was "Let none unversed in geometry enter here," and also turned out many notable philosophers.
Plato's student Aristotle introduced empiricism and the notion that universal truths can be arrived at via observation and induction, thereby laying the foundations of the scientific method.
Aristotle also produced many biological writings that were empirical in nature, focusing on biological causation and the diversity of life.
He made countless observations of nature, especially the habits and attributes of plants and animals on Lesbos, classified more than 540 animal species, and dissected at least 50.
Aristotle's writings profoundly influenced subsequent Islamic and European scholarship, though they were eventually superseded in the Scientific Revolution.
Aristotle also contributed to theories of the elements and the cosmos.
He believed that the celestial bodies (such as the planets and the Sun) had something called an unmoved mover that put the celestial bodies in motion.
Aristotle tried to explain everything through mathematics and physics, but sometimes explained things such as the motion of celestial bodies through a higher power such as God.
Aristotle did not have the technological advancements that would have explained the motion of celestial bodies.
In addition, Aristotle had many views on the elements.
He believed that everything was derived of the elements earth, water, air, fire, and lastly the Aether.
The Aether was a celestial element, and therefore made up the matter of the celestial bodies.
The elements of earth, water, air and fire were derived of a combination of two of the characteristics of hot, wet, cold, and dry, and all had their inevitable place and motion.
The motion of these elements begins with earth being the closest to "the Earth," then water, air, fire, and finally Aether.
In addition to the makeup of all things, Aristotle came up with theories as to why things did not return to their natural motion.
He understood that water sits above earth, air above water, and fire above air in their natural state.
He explained that although all elements must return to their natural state, the human body and other living things have a constraint on the elements – thus not allowing the elements making one who they are to return to their natural state.
The important legacy of this period included substantial advances in factual knowledge, especially in anatomy, zoology, botany, mineralogy, geography, mathematics and astronomy; an awareness of the importance of certain scientific problems, especially those related to the problem of change and its causes; and a recognition of the methodological importance of applying mathematics to natural phenomena and of undertaking empirical research.
In the Hellenistic age scholars frequently employed the principles developed in earlier Greek thought: the application of mathematics and deliberate empirical research, in their scientific investigations.
Neither reason nor inquiry began with the Ancient Greeks, but the Socratic method did, along with the idea of Forms, give great advances in geometry, logic, and the natural sciences.
What Archimedes did was to sort out the theoretical implications of this practical knowledge and present the resulting body of knowledge as a logically coherent system.
Nor should it be supposed that by some trick of translation the extracts have been given an air of modernity.
The vocabulary of these writings and their style are the source from which our own vocabulary and style have been derived.
The astronomer Aristarchus of Samos was the first known person to propose a heliocentric model of the Solar System, while the geographer Eratosthenes accurately calculated the circumference of the Earth.
The level of achievement in Hellenistic astronomy and engineering is impressively shown by the Antikythera mechanism (150–100 BCE), an analog computer for calculating the position of planets.
Technological artifacts of similar complexity did not reappear until the 14th century, when mechanical astronomical clocks appeared in Europe.
There was not a defined societal structure for healthcare during the age of Hippocrates.
At that time, society was not organized and knowledgeable as people still relied on pure religious reasoning to explain illnesses.
Hippocrates introduced the first healthcare system based on science and clinical protocols.
Hippocrates' theories about physics and medicine helped pave the way in creating an organized medical structure for society.
In medicine, Hippocrates (c.
Hippocrates' ideas are expressed in The Hippocratic Corpus.
The collection notes descriptions of medical philosophies and how disease and lifestyle choices reflect on the physical body.
Hippocrates influenced a Westernized, professional relationship among physician and patient.
Hippocrates is also known as "the Father of Medicine".
Herophilos (335–280 BCE) was the first to base his conclusions on dissection of the human body and to describe the nervous system.
In Hellenistic Egypt, the mathematician Euclid laid down the foundations of mathematical rigor and introduced the concepts of definition, axiom, theorem and proof still in use today in his Elements, considered the most influential textbook ever written.
Archimedes, considered one of the greatest mathematicians of all time, is credited with using the method of exhaustion to calculate the area under the arc of a parabola with the summation of an infinite series, and gave a remarkably accurate approximation of pi.
He is also known in physics for laying the foundations of hydrostatics, statics, and the explanation of the principle of the lever.
Theophrastus wrote some of the earliest descriptions of plants and animals, establishing the first taxonomy and looking at minerals in terms of their properties, such as hardness.
Pliny the Elder produced one of the largest encyclopedias of the natural world in 77 CE, and was a successor to Theophrastus.
For example, he accurately describes the octahedral shape of the diamond and noted that diamond dust is used by engravers to cut and polish other gems owing to its great hardness.
His recognition of the importance of crystal shape is a precursor to modern crystallography, while notes on other minerals presages mineralogy.
He recognizes other minerals have characteristic crystal shapes, but in one example, confuses the crystal habit with the work of lapidaries.
Pliny was the first to show amber was a resin from pine trees, because of trapped insects within them.
The development of archaeology has its roots in history and with those who were interested in the past, such as kings and queens who wanted to show past glories of their respective nations.
The 5th-century-BCE Greek historian Herodotus was the first scholar to systematically study the past and perhaps the first to examine artifacts.
During the rule of Rome, famous historians such as Polybius, Livy and Plutarch documented the rise of the Roman Republic, and the organization and histories of other nations, while statesmen like Julius Caesar, Cicero, and others provided examples of the politics of the republic and Rome's empire and wars.
The study of politics during this age was oriented toward understanding history, understanding methods of governing, and describing the operation of governments.
The Roman conquest of Greece did not diminish learning and culture in the Greek provinces.
On the contrary, the appreciation of Greek achievements in literature, philosophy, politics, and the arts by Rome's upper class coincided with the increased prosperity of the Roman Empire.
Greek settlements had existed in Italy for centuries and the ability to read and speak Greek was not uncommon in Italian cities such as Rome.
Moreover, the settlement of Greek scholars in Rome, whether voluntarily or as slaves, gave Romans access to teachers of Greek literature and philosophy.
Conversely, young Roman scholars also studied abroad in Greece and upon their return to Rome, were able to convey Greek achievements to their Latin leadership.
And despite the translation of a few Greek texts into Latin, Roman scholars who aspired to the highest level did so using the Greek language.
The Roman statesman and philosopher Cicero (106 – 43 BCE) was a prime example.
He had studied under Greek teachers in Rome and then in Athens and Rhodes.
He mastered considerable portions of Greek philosophy, wrote Latin treatises on several topics, and even wrote Greek commentaries of Plato's Timaeus as well as a Latin translation of it, which has not survived.
In the beginning, support for scholarship in Greek knowledge was almost entirely funded by the Roman upper class.
There were all sorts of arrangements, ranging from a talented scholar being attached to a wealthy household to owning educated Greek-speaking slaves.
In exchange, scholars who succeeded at the highest level had an obligation to provide advice or intellectual companionship to their Roman benefactors, or to even take care of their libraries.
The less fortunate or accomplished ones would teach their children or perform menial tasks.
The level of detail and sophistication of Greek knowledge was adjusted to suit the interests of their Roman patrons.
That meant popularizing Greek knowledge by presenting information that were of practical value such as medicine or logic (for courts and politics) but excluding subtle details of Greek metaphysics and epistemology.
Beyond the basics, the Romans did not value natural philosophy and considered it an amusement for leisure time.
Commentaries and encyclopedias were the means by which Greek knowledge was popularized for Roman audiences.
The Greek scholar Posidonius (c.
He greatly influenced Latin writers such as Marcus Terentius Varro (116-27 BCE), who wrote the encyclopedia Nine Books of Disciplines, which covered nine arts: grammar, rhetoric, logic, arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, musical theory, medicine, and architecture.
The Disciplines became a model for subsequent Roman encyclopedias and Varro's nine liberal arts were considered suitable education for a Roman gentleman.
The first seven of Varro's nine arts would later define the seven liberal arts of medieval schools.
The pinnacle of the popularization movement was the Roman scholar Pliny the Elder (23/24–79 CE), a native of northern Italy, who wrote several books on the history of Rome and grammar.
His most famous work was his voluminous Natural History.
After the death of the Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius in 180 CE, the favorable conditions for scholarship and learning in the Roman Empire were upended by political unrest, civil war, urban decay, and looming economic crisis.
In around 250 CE, barbarians began attacking and invading the Roman frontiers.
These combined events led to a general decline in political and economic conditions.
The living standards of the Roman upper class was severely impacted, and their loss of leisure diminished scholarly pursuits.
Moreover, during the 3rd and 4th centuries CE, the Roman Empire was administratively divided into two halves: Greek East and Latin West.
These administrative divisions weakened the intellectual contact between the two regions.
Eventually, both halves went their separate ways, with the Greek East becoming the Byzantine Empire.
Christianity was also steadily expanding during this time and soon became a major patron of education in the Latin West.
Initially, the Christian church adopted some of the reasoning tools of Greek philosophy in the 2nd and 3rd centuries CE to defend its faith against sophisticated opponents.
Nevertheless, Greek philosophy received a mixed reception from leaders and adherents of the Christian faith.
Some such as Tertullian (c.
Others such as Augustine of Hippo (354-430 CE) were ambivalent and defended Greek philosophy and science as the best ways to understand the natural world and therefore treated it as a handmaiden (or servant) of religion.
Education in the West began its gradual decline, along with the rest of Western Roman Empire, due to invasions by Germanic tribes, civil unrest, and economic collapse.
Contact with the classical tradition was lost in specific regions such as Roman Britain and northern Gaul but continued to exist in Rome, northern Italy, southern Gaul, Spain, and North Africa.
In the Middle Ages, the classical learning continued in three major linguistic cultures and civilizations: Greek (the Byzantine Empire), Arabic (the Islamic world), and Latin (Western Europe).
The fall of the Western Roman Empire led to a deterioration of the classical tradition in the western part (or Latin West) of Europe during the 5th century.
In contrast, the Byzantine Empire resisted the barbarian attacks and preserved and improved the learning.
While the Byzantine Empire still held learning centers such as Constantinople, Alexandria and Antioch, Western Europe's knowledge was concentrated in monasteries until the development of medieval universities in the 12th centuries.
The curriculum of monastic schools included the study of the few available ancient texts and of new works on practical subjects like medicine and timekeeping.
In the sixth century in the Byzantine Empire, Isidore of Miletus compiled Archimedes' mathematical works in the Archimedes Palimpsest, where all Archimedes' mathematical contributions were collected and studied.
John Philoponus, another Byzantine scholar, was the first to question Aristotle's teaching of physics, introducing the theory of impetus.
The theory of impetus was an auxiliary or secondary theory of Aristotelian dynamics, put forth initially to explain projectile motion against gravity.
It is the intellectual precursor to the concepts of inertia, momentum and acceleration in classical mechanics.
The works of John Philoponus inspired Galileo Galilei ten centuries later.
During the Fall of Constantinople in 1453, a number of Greek scholars fled to North Italy in which they fueled the era later commonly known as the "Renaissance" as they brought with them a great deal of classical learning including an understanding of botany, medicine, and zoology.
Byzantium also gave the West important inputs: John Philoponus' criticism of Aristotelian physics, and the works of Dioscorides.
This was the period (8th–14th century CE) of the Islamic Golden Age where commerce thrived, and new ideas and technologies emerged such as the importation of papermaking from China, which made the copying of manuscripts inexpensive.
The eastward transmission of Greek heritage to Western Asia was a slow and gradual process that spanned over a thousand years, beginning with the Asian conquests of Alexander the Great in 335 BCE to the founding of Islam in the 7th century CE.
The birth and expansion of Islam during the 7th century was quickly followed by its Hellenization.
Knowledge of Greek conceptions of the world was preserved and absorbed into Islamic theology, law, culture, and commerce, which were aided by the translations of traditional Greek texts and some Syriac intermediary sources into Arabic during the 8th–9th century.
Madrasas were centers for many different religious and scientific studies and were the culmination of different institutions such as mosques based around religious studies, housing for out-of-town visitors, and finally educational institutions focused on the natural sciences.
Unlike Western universities, students at a madrasa would learn from one specific teacher, who would issue a certificate at the completion of their studies called an Ijazah.
An Ijazah differs from a western university degree in many ways one being that it is issued by a single person rather than an institution, and another being that it is not an individual degree declaring adequate knowledge over broad subjects, but rather a license to teach and pass on a very specific set of texts.
Women were also allowed to attend madrasas, as both students and teachers, something not seen in high western education until the 1800s.
Madrasas were more than just academic centers.
The Suleymaniye Mosque, for example, was one of the earliest and most well-known madrasas, which was built by Suleiman the Magnificent in the 16th century.
The Suleymaniye Mosque was home to a hospital and medical college, a kitchen, and children's school, as well as serving as a temporary home for travelers.
Higher education at a madrasa (or college) was focused on Islamic law and religious science and students had to engage in self-study for everything else.
And despite the occasional theological backlash, many Islamic scholars of science were able to conduct their work in relatively tolerant urban centers (e.
They could also travel freely and exchange ideas as there were no political barriers within the unified Islamic state.
Islamic science during this time was primarily focused on the correction, extension, articulation, and application of Greek ideas to new problems.
Most of the achievements by Islamic scholars during this period were in mathematics.
Arabic mathematics was a direct descendant of Greek and Indian mathematics.
For instance, what is now known as Arabic numerals originally came from India, but Muslim mathematicians made several key refinements to the number system, such as the introduction of decimal point notation.
Mathematicians such as Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi (c.
Islamic trigonometry continued from the works of Ptolemy's Almagest and Indian Siddhanta, from which they added trigonometric functions, drew up tables, and applied trigonometry to spheres and planes.
Many of their engineers, instruments makers, and surveyors contributed books in applied mathematics.
It was in astronomy where Islamic mathematicians made their greatest contributions.
Al-Battani also improved the precision of the measurement of the precession of the Earth's axis.
Corrections were made to Ptolemy's geocentric model by al-Battani, Ibn al-Haytham, Averroes and the Maragha astronomers such as Nasir al-Din al-Tusi, Mu'ayyad al-Din al-Urdi and Ibn al-Shatir.
Scholars with geometric skills made significant improvements to the earlier classical texts on light and sight by Euclid, Aristotle, and Ptolemy.
The earliest surviving Arabic treatises were written in the 9th century by Abū Ishāq al-Kindī, Qustā ibn Lūqā, and (in fragmentary form) Ahmad ibn Isā.
Later in the 11th century, Ibn al-Haytham (known as Alhazen in the West), a mathematician and astronomer, synthesized a new theory of vision based on the works of his predecessors.
His new theory included a complete system of geometrical optics, which was set in great detail in his Book of Optics.
His book was translated into Latin and was relied upon as a principal source on the science of optics in Europe until the 17th century.
The medical sciences were prominently cultivated in the Islamic world.
The works of Greek medical theories, especially those of Galen, were translated into Arabic and there was an outpouring of medical texts by Islamic physicians, which were aimed at organizing, elaborating, and disseminating classical medical knowledge.
Medical specialties started to emerge, such as those involved in the treatment of eye diseases such as cataracts.
Ibn Sina (known as Avicenna in the West, c.
Amongst his many contributions are the discovery of the contagious nature of infectious diseases, and the introduction of clinical pharmacology.
Institutionalization of medicine was another important achievement in the Islamic world.
Although hospitals as an institution for the sick emerged in the Byzantium empire, the model of institutionalized medicine for all social classes was extensive in the Islamic empire and was scattered throughout.
In addition to treating patients, physicians could teach apprentice physicians, as well write and do research.
The discovery of the pulmonary transit of blood in the human body by Ibn al-Nafis occurred in a hospital setting.
Islamic science began its decline in the 12th–13th century, before the Renaissance in Europe, due in part to the Christian reconquest of Spain and the Mongol conquests in the East in the 11th–13th century.
The Mongols sacked Baghdad, capital of the Abbasid Caliphate, in 1258, which ended the Abbasid empire.
Nevertheless, many of the conquerors became patrons of the sciences.
Hulagu Khan, for example, who led the siege of Baghdad, became a patron of the Maragheh observatory.
Islamic astronomy continued to flourish into the 16th century.
By the eleventh century, most of Europe had become Christian; stronger monarchies emerged; borders were restored; technological developments and agricultural innovations were made, increasing the food supply and population.
Classical Greek texts were translated from Arabic and Greek into Latin, stimulating scientific discussion in Western Europe.
In classical antiquity, Greek and Roman taboos had meant that dissection was usually banned, but in the Middle Ages medical teachers and students at Bologna began to open human bodies, and Mondino de Luzzi (c.
As a result of the Pax Mongolica, Europeans, such as Marco Polo, began to venture further and further east.
The written accounts of Polo and his fellow travelers inspired other Western European maritime explorers to search for a direct sea route to Asia, ultimately leading to the Age of Discovery.
Technological advances were also made, such as the early flight of Eilmer of Malmesbury (who had studied mathematics in 11th-century England), and the metallurgical achievements of the Cistercian blast furnace at Laskill.
An intellectual revitalization of Western Europe started with the birth of medieval universities in the 12th century.
These urban institutions grew from the informal scholarly activities of learned friars who visited monasteries, consulted libraries, and conversed with other fellow scholars.
A friar who became well-known would attract a following of disciples, giving rise to a brotherhood of scholars (or collegium in Latin).
A collegium might travel to a town or request a monastery to host them.
However, if the number of scholars within a collegium grew too large, they would opt to settle in a town instead.
As the number of collegia within a town grew, the collegia might request that their king grant them a charter that would convert them into a universitas.
Many universities were chartered during this period, with the first in Bologna in 1088, followed by Paris in 1150, Oxford in 1167, and Cambridge in 1231.
The granting of a charter meant that the medieval universities were partially sovereign and independent from local authorities.
Their independence allowed them to conduct themselves and judge their own members based on their own rules.
Furthermore, as initially religious institutions, their faculties and students were protected from capital punishment (e.
Such independence was a matter of custom, which could, in principle, be revoked by their respective rulers if they felt threatened.
Discussions of various subjects or claims at these medieval institutions, no matter how controversial, were done in a formalized way so as to declare such discussions as being within the bounds of a university and therefore protected by the privileges of that institution's sovereignty.
A claim could be described as ex cathedra (literally "from the chair", used within the context of teaching) or ex hypothesi (by hypothesis).
This meant that the discussions were presented as purely an intellectual exercise that did not require those involved to commit themselves to the truth of a claim or to proselytize.
Modern academic concepts and practices such as academic freedom or freedom of inquiry are remnants of these medieval privileges that were tolerated in the past.
The curriculum of these medieval institutions centered on the seven liberal arts, which were aimed at providing beginning students with the skills for reasoning and scholarly language.
Students would begin their studies starting with the first three liberal arts or Trivium (grammar, rhetoric, and logic) followed by the next four liberal arts or Quadrivium (arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music).
Those who completed these requirements and received their baccalaureate (or Bachelor of Arts) had the option to join the higher faculty (law, medicine, or theology), which would confer an LLD for a lawyer, an MD for a physician, or ThD for a theologian.
Students who chose to remain in the lower faculty (arts) could work towards a Magister (or Master's) degree and would study three philosophies: metaphysics, ethics, and natural philosophy.
Latin translations of Aristotle's works such as De Anima (On the Soul) and the commentaries on them were required readings.
As time passed, the lower faculty was allowed to confer its own doctoral degree called the PhD.
Many of the Masters were drawn to encyclopedias and had used them as textbooks.
But these scholars yearned for the complete original texts of the Ancient Greek philosophers, mathematicians, and physicians such as Aristotle, Euclid, and Galen, which were not available to them at the time.
These Ancient Greek texts were to be found in the Byzantine Empire and the Islamic World.
Contact with the Byzantine Empire, and with the Islamic world during the Reconquista and the Crusades, allowed Latin Europe access to scientific Greek and Arabic texts, including the works of Aristotle, Ptolemy, Isidore of Miletus, John Philoponus, Jābir ibn Hayyān, al-Khwarizmi, Alhazen, Avicenna, and Averroes.
European scholars had access to the translation programs of Raymond of Toledo, who sponsored the 12th century Toledo School of Translators from Arabic to Latin.
Later translators like Michael Scotus would learn Arabic in order to study these texts directly.
The European universities aided materially in the translation and propagation of these texts and started a new infrastructure which was needed for scientific communities.
In fact, European university put many works about the natural world and the study of nature at the center of its curriculum, with the result that the "medieval university laid far greater emphasis on science than does its modern counterpart and descendent.
At the beginning of the 13th century, there were reasonably accurate Latin translations of the main works of almost all the intellectually crucial ancient authors, allowing a sound transfer of scientific ideas via both the universities and the monasteries.
By then, the natural philosophy in these texts began to be extended by scholastics such as Robert Grosseteste, Roger Bacon, Albertus Magnus and Duns Scotus.
Precursors of the modern scientific method, influenced by earlier contributions of the Islamic world, can be seen already in Grosseteste's emphasis on mathematics as a way to understand nature, and in the empirical approach admired by Bacon, particularly in his Opus Majus.
In the 13th century Stephen Tempier – the Bishop of Paris – issued strict religious restrictions related to the study of Aristotle (the Condemnation of 1277).
While the physicist Pierre Duhem's thesis that this, paradoxically, led to the study of medieval science as a serious discipline, "no one in the field any longer endorses his view that modern science started in 1277".
However, many scholars agree with Duhem's view that the mid-late Middle Ages saw important scientific developments and continue to argue that the 13th-century Condemnations were beneficial for medieval natural philosophy because they loosened the hold of Aristotelian dogma on natural philosophers in the following century.
By condemning any proposition of natural philosophy that subordinated divine omnipotence - "God's absolute power" - to Aristotelian impossibilities, the Condemnations, it is argued, may have inadvertently freed scholars to explore "what-if" scenarios that Aristotle had declared impossible, such as the existence of a vacuum, the plurality of worlds, or the rotation of the Earth.
This encouraged a shift in natural philosophy from an Aristotelian-style search for logical necessity toward the possibility of contingency (e.
The natural philosophy of the first half of the 14th century consisted largely of scholastic commentaries on, and arguments about, Latin translations of the work of Aristotle.
William of Ockham emphasized the principle of parsimony: natural philosophers should not postulate unnecessary entities, so that motion is not a distinct thing but is only the moving object and an intermediary "sensible species" is not needed to transmit an image of an object to the eye.
Scholars such as Jean Buridan and Nicole Oresme started to reinterpret elements of Aristotle's mechanics.
In particular, Buridan developed the theory that impetus was the cause of the motion of projectiles, which was a first step towards the modern concept of inertia.
The Oxford Calculators began to mathematically analyze the kinematics of motion, making this analysis without considering the causes of motion.
In 1348, the Black Death and other disasters abruptly interrupted this scholarship.
The introduction and rapid spread of the movable type printing press during the 2nd half of the 15th century ended the manuscript culture of the Middle Ages, where facts were few and far between, and replaced it with a printing culture where reliable and documented facts rapidly proliferated and became the secure foundation for scientific knowledge.
The Fall of Constantinople in 1453 caused many Byzantine scholars to seek refuge in the West.
In the mid-15th century, Venetian glassmakers developed the exceptionally clear colourless glass, cristallo, made from high-purity quartz pebbles (instead of sand) and using manganese oxide as a "decolorizer" to neutralize the greenish tint caused by iron impurities.
This was the "specialty" glass of the era, a luxury product used for windows, mirrors, ships' lanterns, and lenses.
When the first telescope was later invented during the Scientific Revolution, the first historical record of the invention did not appear in a work of natural philosophy but rather in a patent filed by a spectacle maker.
The encounter with the Americas, continents that were completely unknown to the ancients, profoundly impacted European intellectual life in the 16th century and specifically undermined the authority of Claudius Ptolemy, the 2nd-century scholar whose geographic and astronomical models had previously been considered infallible.
Vesalius's work on human cadavers found problems with the Galenic view of anatomy.
The Northern Renaissance showed a decisive shift in focus from Aristotelian natural philosophy to chemistry and the biological sciences (botany, anatomy, and medicine).
Copernican heliocentrism is the astronomical model developed by Nicolaus Copernicus and published in 1543.
This model positioned the Sun near the center of the Universe, motionless, with Earth and the other planets orbiting around it in circular motions, modified by epicycles, and at uniform speeds.
The Copernican model challenged the dominant geocentric model of Ptolemy, which had placed Earth at the center of the Universe.
The Scientific Revolution of the 16th and 17th centuries in Europe marked a sharp break with the natural philosophy that had preceded it.
The New Science that emerged departed from previous Greek conceptions and traditions, was more mechanistic in its worldview and more integrated with mathematics, and was obsessed with the acquisition and interpretation of new evidence.
The Scientific Revolution is a convenient boundary between ancient thought and modern science.
While the period is frequently said to have begun in 1543 with the printings of De humani corporis fabrica (On the Workings of the Human Body) by Andreas Vesalius and De Revolutionibus (On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres) by Nicolaus Copernicus, the SN 1572 supernova has also been suggested as its beginning.
The period culminated with the publication of the Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica in 1687 by Isaac Newton, representative of the unprecedented growth of scientific publications throughout Europe.
Tycho Brahe's unprecedentedly accurate astronomical observations in the late 16th century and Galileo Galilei’s early 17th-century telescopic observations combined to turn astronomy into the first modern science.
Galileo's observations ended a millenium of pre-modern astronomical orthodoxy while Johannes Kepler used Brahe's data to discover that planets have elliptical, not circular, orbits and develop the laws of planetary motion.
Because of Kepler, astronomical phenomena came to be seen as being governed by physical laws.
In 1687, Isaac Newton published the Principia Mathematica, detailing two comprehensive and successful physical theories: Newton's laws of motion, which led to classical mechanics; and Newton's law of universal gravitation, which describes the fundamental force of gravity.
A decisive moment came when "chemistry" was distinguished from alchemy by Robert Boyle in his work The Sceptical Chymist, in 1661; although the alchemical tradition continued for some time after his work.
Other important steps included the gravimetric experimental practices of medical chemists like William Cullen, Joseph Black, Torbern Bergman and Pierre Macquer and through the work of Antoine Lavoisier ("father of modern chemistry") on oxygen and the law of conservation of mass, which refuted phlogiston theory.
Modern chemistry emerged from the sixteenth through the eighteenth centuries through the material practices and theories promoted by alchemy, medicine, manufacturing and mining.
William Harvey published De Motu Cordis in 1628, which revealed his conclusions based on his extensive studies of vertebrate circulatory systems.
He identified the central role of the heart, arteries, and veins in producing blood movement in a circuit, and failed to find any confirmation of Galen's pre-existing notions of heating and cooling functions.
The history of early modern biology and medicine is often told through the search for the seat of the soul.
Galen in his descriptions of his foundational work in medicine presents the distinctions between arteries, veins, and nerves using the vocabulary of the soul.
A critical innovation was the creation of permanent scientific societies and their scholarly journals, which dramatically sped the diffusion of new ideas.
Typical was the founding of the Royal Society in London in 1660 and its journal in 1665 the Philosophical Transaction of the Royal Society, the first scientific journal in English.
Science drawing on the works of Newton, Descartes, Pascal and Leibniz, science was on a path to modern mathematics, physics and technology by the time of the generation of Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790), Leonhard Euler (1707–1783), Mikhail Lomonosov (1711–1765) and Jean le Rond d'Alembert (1717–1783).
Denis Diderot's Encyclopédie, published between 1751 and 1772 brought this new understanding to a wider audience.
The impact of this process was not limited to science and technology, but affected philosophy (Immanuel Kant, David Hume), religion (the increasingly significant impact of science upon religion), and society and politics in general (Adam Smith, Voltaire).
Geology did not undergo systematic restructuring during the Scientific Revolution but instead existed as a cloud of isolated, disconnected ideas about rocks, minerals, and landforms long before it became a coherent science.
Robert Hooke formulated a theory of earthquakes, and Nicholas Steno developed the theory of superposition and argued that fossils were the remains of once-living creatures.
Beginning with Thomas Burnet's Sacred Theory of the Earth in 1681, natural philosophers began to explore the idea that the Earth had changed over time.
Burnet and his contemporaries interpreted Earth's past in terms of events described in the Bible, but their work laid the intellectual foundations for secular interpretations of Earth history.
During the late 18th century, researchers such as Hugh Williamson and John Walsh experimented on the effects of electricity on the human body.
Further studies by Luigi Galvani and Alessandro Volta established the electrical nature of what Volta called galvanism.
Electricity thus became in Romanticism a multifaceted symbol representing both revolutionary fervor and the creative force of nature, as well as a metaphor for the pervasive power of the mind and its spiritual connection.
Its presence, both literal and figurative, in both scientific experiments and literature, such as Galvani's study of electrical effects on bodies, fueled the Romantic imagination, serving as a vital concept bridging the animate and the inanimate, the rational and the spiritual.
Modern geology, like modern chemistry, gradually evolved during the 18th and early 19th centuries.
Benoît de Maillet and the Comte de Buffon saw the Earth as much older than the 6,000 years envisioned by biblical scholars.
Jean-Étienne Guettard and Nicolas Desmarest hiked central France and recorded their observations on some of the first geological maps.
Aided by chemical experimentation, naturalists such as Scotland's John Walker, Sweden's Torbern Bergman, and Germany's Abraham Werner created comprehensive classification systems for rocks and minerals—a collective achievement that transformed geology into a cutting edge field by the end of the eighteenth century.
These early geologists also proposed a generalized interpretations of Earth history that led James Hutton, Georges Cuvier and Alexandre Brongniart, following in the steps of Steno, to argue that layers of rock could be dated by the fossils they contained: a principle first applied to the geology of the Paris Basin.
The use of index fossils became a powerful tool for making geological maps, because it allowed geologists to correlate the rocks in one locality with those of similar age in other, distant localities.
The basis for classical economics forms Adam Smith's An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, published in 1776.
Smith criticized mercantilism, advocating a system of free trade with division of labour.
He postulated an "invisible hand" that regulated economic systems made up of actors guided only by self-interest.
The "invisible hand" mentioned in a lost page in the middle of a chapter in the middle of the "Wealth of Nations", 1776, advances as Smith's central message.
Anthropology can best be understood as an outgrowth of the Age of Enlightenment.
It was during this period that Europeans attempted systematically to study human behavior.
Traditions of jurisprudence, history, philology and sociology developed during this time and informed the development of the social sciences of which anthropology was a part.
The 19th century saw the birth of science as a profession.
William Whewell had coined the term scientist in 1833, which soon replaced the older term natural philosopher.
In physics, the behavior of electricity and magnetism was studied by Giovanni Aldini, Alessandro Volta, Michael Faraday, Georg Ohm, and others.
The experiments, theories and discoveries of Michael Faraday, Andre-Marie Ampere, James Clerk Maxwell, and their contemporaries led to the unification of the two phenomena into a single theory of electromagnetism as described by Maxwell's equations.
Thermodynamics led to an understanding of heat and the notion of energy being defined.
In astronomy, the planet Neptune was discovered.
Advances in astronomy and in optical systems in the 19th century resulted in the first observation of an asteroid (1 Ceres) in 1801, and the discovery of Neptune in 1846.
In mathematics, the notion of complex numbers finally matured and led to a subsequent analytical theory; they also began the use of hypercomplex numbers.
Karl Weierstrass and others carried out the arithmetization of analysis for functions of real and complex variables.
It also saw rise to new progress in geometry beyond those classical theories of Euclid, after a period of nearly two thousand years.
The mathematical science of logic likewise had revolutionary breakthroughs after a similarly long period of stagnation.
But the most important step in science at this time were the ideas formulated by the creators of electrical science.
Their work changed the face of physics and made possible for new technology to come about such as electric power, electrical telegraphy, the telephone, and radio.
In chemistry, Dmitri Mendeleev, following the atomic theory of John Dalton, created the first periodic table of elements.
Other highlights include the discoveries unveiling the nature of atomic structure and matter, simultaneously with chemistry – and of new kinds of radiation.
The theory that all matter is made of atoms, which are the smallest constituents of matter that cannot be broken down without losing the basic chemical and physical properties of that matter, was provided by John Dalton in 1803, although the question took a hundred years to settle as proven.
Dalton also formulated the law of mass relationships.
In 1869, Dmitri Mendeleev composed his periodic table of elements on the basis of Dalton's discoveries.
The synthesis of urea by Friedrich Wöhler opened a new research field, organic chemistry, and by the end of the 19th century, scientists were able to synthesize hundreds of organic compounds.
The later part of the 19th century saw the exploitation of the Earth's petrochemicals, after the exhaustion of the oil supply from whaling.
By the 20th century, systematic production of refined materials provided a ready supply of products which provided not only energy, but also synthetic materials for clothing, medicine, and everyday disposable resources.
Application of the techniques of organic chemistry to living organisms resulted in physiological chemistry, the precursor to biochemistry.
Over the first half of the 19th century, geologists such as Charles Lyell, Adam Sedgwick, and Roderick Murchison applied the new technique to rocks throughout Europe and eastern North America, setting the stage for more detailed, government-funded mapping projects in later decades.
Midway through the 19th century, the focus of geology shifted from description and classification to attempts to understand how the surface of the Earth had changed.
The first comprehensive theories of mountain building were proposed during this period, as were the first modern theories of earthquakes and volcanoes.
Louis Agassiz and others established the reality of continent-covering ice ages, and "fluvialists" like Andrew Crombie Ramsay argued that river valleys were formed, over millions of years by the rivers that flow through them.
After the discovery of radioactivity, radiometric dating methods were developed, starting in the 20th century.
Alfred Wegener's theory of "continental drift" was widely dismissed when he proposed it in the 1910s, but new data gathered in the 1950s and 1960s led to the theory of plate tectonics, which provided a plausible mechanism for it.
Plate tectonics also provided a unified explanation for a wide range of seemingly unrelated geological phenomena.
Since the 1960s it has served as the unifying principle in geology.
Perhaps the most prominent, controversial, and far-reaching theory in all of science has been the theory of evolution by natural selection, which was independently formulated by Charles Darwin and Alfred Wallace.
It was described in detail in Darwin's book The Origin of Species, which was published in 1859.
In it, Darwin proposed that the features of all living things, including humans, were shaped by natural processes over long periods of time.
The theory of evolution in its current form affects almost all areas of biology.
Implications of evolution on fields outside of pure science have led to both opposition and support from different parts of society, and profoundly influenced the popular understanding of "man's place in the universe".
Separately, Gregor Mendel formulated the principles of inheritance in 1866, which became the basis of modern genetics.
Another important landmark in medicine and biology were the successful efforts to prove the germ theory of disease.
Following this, Louis Pasteur made the first vaccine against rabies, and also made many discoveries in the field of chemistry, including the asymmetry of crystals.
In 1847, Hungarian physician Ignác Fülöp Semmelweis dramatically reduced the occurrence of puerperal fever by simply requiring physicians to wash their hands before attending to women in childbirth.
This discovery predated the germ theory of disease.
However, Semmelweis' findings were not appreciated by his contemporaries and handwashing came into use only with discoveries by British surgeon Joseph Lister, who in 1865 proved the principles of antisepsis.
Lister's work was based on the important findings by French biologist Louis Pasteur.
Pasteur was able to link microorganisms with disease, revolutionizing medicine.
He also devised one of the most important methods in preventive medicine, when in 1880 he produced a vaccine against rabies.
Pasteur invented the process of pasteurization, to help prevent the spread of disease through milk and other foods.
Karl Marx developed an alternative economic theory, called Marxian economics.
Marxian economics is based on the labor theory of value and assumes the value of good to be based on the amount of labor required to produce it.
Under this axiom, capitalism was based on employers not paying the full value of workers labor to create profit.
The Austrian School responded to Marxian economics by viewing entrepreneurship as driving force of economic development.
This replaced the labor theory of value by a system of supply and demand.
Psychology as a scientific enterprise that was independent from philosophy began in 1879 when Wilhelm Wundt founded the first laboratory dedicated exclusively to psychological research (in Leipzig).
Other important early contributors to the field include Hermann Ebbinghaus (a pioneer in memory studies), Ivan Pavlov (who discovered classical conditioning), William James, and Sigmund Freud.
Freud's influence has been enormous, though more as cultural icon than a force in scientific psychology.
Modern sociology emerged in the early 19th century as the academic response to the modernization of the world.
Among many early sociologists (e.
Max Weber was concerned with the modernization of society through the concept of rationalization, which he believed would trap individuals in an "iron cage" of rational thought.
Some sociologists, including Georg Simmel and W.
Du Bois, used more microsociological, qualitative analyses.
This microlevel approach played an important role in American sociology, with the theories of George Herbert Mead and his student Herbert Blumer resulting in the creation of the symbolic interactionism approach to sociology.
In particular, just Auguste Comte, illustrated with his work the transition from a theological to a metaphysical stage and, from this, to a positive stage.
Comte took care of the classification of the sciences as well as a transit of humanity towards a situation of progress attributable to a re-examination of nature according to the affirmation of 'sociality' as the basis of the scientifically interpreted society.
The Romantic Movement of the early 19th century reshaped science by opening up new pursuits unexpected in the classical approaches of the Enlightenment.
The decline of Romanticism occurred because a new movement, Positivism, began to take hold of the ideals of the intellectuals after 1840 and lasted until about 1880.
At the same time, the romantic reaction to the Enlightenment produced thinkers such as Johann Gottfried Herder and later Wilhelm Dilthey whose work formed the basis for the culture concept which is central to the discipline.
Traditionally, much of the history of the subject was based on colonial encounters between Western Europe and the rest of the world, and much of 18th- and 19th-century anthropology is now classed as scientific racism.
During the late 19th century, battles over the "study of man" took place between those of an "anthropological" persuasion (relying on anthropometrical techniques) and those of an "ethnological" persuasion (looking at cultures and traditions), and these distinctions became part of the later divide between physical anthropology and cultural anthropology, the latter ushered in by the students of Franz Boas.
Science advanced dramatically during the 20th century.
There were new and radical developments in the physical and life sciences, building on the progress from the 19th century.
The beginning of the 20th century brought the start of a revolution in physics.
The long-held theories of Newton were shown not to be correct in all circumstances.
Beginning in 1900, Max Planck, Albert Einstein, Niels Bohr and others developed quantum theories to explain various anomalous experimental results, by introducing discrete energy levels.
Not only did quantum mechanics show that the laws of motion did not hold on small scales, but the theory of general relativity, proposed by Einstein in 1915, showed that the fixed background of spacetime, on which both Newtonian mechanics and special relativity depended, could not exist.
In 1925, Werner Heisenberg and Erwin Schrödinger formulated quantum mechanics, which explained the preceding quantum theories.
Currently, general relativity and quantum mechanics are inconsistent with each other, and efforts are underway to unify the two.
The observation by Edwin Hubble in 1929 that the speed at which galaxies recede positively correlates with their distance, led to the understanding that the universe is expanding, and the formulation of the Big Bang theory by Georges Lemaître.
George Gamow, Ralph Alpher, and Robert Herman had calculated that there should be evidence for a Big Bang in the background temperature of the universe.
In 1964, Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson discovered a 3 Kelvin background hiss in their Bell Labs radiotelescope (the Holmdel Horn Antenna), which was evidence for this hypothesis, and formed the basis for a number of results that helped determine the age of the universe.
In 1938 Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann discovered nuclear fission with radiochemical methods, and in 1939 Lise Meitner and Otto Robert Frisch wrote the first theoretical interpretation of the fission process, which was later improved by Niels Bohr and John A.
Further developments took place during World War II, which led to the practical application of radar and the development and use of the atomic bomb.
Around this time, Chien-Shiung Wu was recruited by the Manhattan Project to help develop a process for separating uranium metal into U-235 and U-238 isotopes by Gaseous diffusion.
She was an expert experimentalist in beta decay and weak interaction physics.
Wu designed an experiment (see Wu experiment) that enabled theoretical physicists Tsung-Dao Lee and Chen-Ning Yang to disprove the law of parity experimentally, winning them a Nobel Prize in 1957.
Though the process had begun with the invention of the cyclotron by Ernest O.
Lawrence in the 1930s, physics in the postwar period entered into a phase of what historians have called "Big Science", requiring massive machines, budgets, and laboratories in order to test their theories and move into new frontiers.
The primary patron of physics became state governments, who recognized that the support of "basic" research could often lead to technologies useful to both military and industrial applications.
In the early 20th century, the study of heredity became a major investigation after the rediscovery in 1900 of the laws of inheritance developed by Mendel.
The 20th century also saw the integration of physics and chemistry, with chemical properties explained as the result of the electronic structure of the atom.
Linus Pauling's book on The Nature of the Chemical Bond used the principles of quantum mechanics to deduce bond angles in ever-more complicated molecules.
Pauling's work culminated in the physical modelling of DNA, the secret of life (in the words of Francis Crick, 1953).
In the same year, the Miller–Urey experiment demonstrated in a simulation of primordial processes, that basic constituents of proteins, simple amino acids, could themselves be built up from simpler molecules, kickstarting decades of research into the chemical origins of life.
Watson and Francis Crick clarified the basic structure of DNA, the genetic material for expressing life in all its forms, building on the work of Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin, suggested that the structure of DNA was a double helix.
In their famous paper "Molecular structure of Nucleic Acids" In the late 20th century, the possibilities of genetic engineering became practical for the first time, and a massive international effort began in 1990 to map out an entire human genome (the Human Genome Project).
The discipline of ecology typically traces its origin to the synthesis of Darwinian evolution and Humboldtian biogeography, in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Equally important in the rise of ecology, however, were microbiology and soil science—particularly the cycle of life concept, prominent in the work of Louis Pasteur and Ferdinand Cohn.
The word ecology was coined by Ernst Haeckel, whose particularly holistic view of nature in general (and Darwin's theory in particular) was important in the spread of ecological thinking.
The field of ecosystem ecology emerged in the Atomic Age with the use of radioisotopes to visualize food webs and by the 1970s ecosystem ecology deeply influenced global environmental management.
In 1925, Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin determined that stars were composed mostly of hydrogen and helium.
She was dissuaded by astronomer Henry Norris Russell from publishing this finding in her PhD thesis because of the widely held belief that stars had the same composition as the Earth.
However, four years later, in 1929, Henry Norris Russell came to the same conclusion through different reasoning and the discovery was eventually accepted.
In 1987, supernova SN 1987A was observed by astronomers on Earth both visually, and in a triumph for neutrino astronomy, by the solar neutrino detectors at Kamiokande.
But the solar neutrino flux was a fraction of its theoretically expected value.
This discrepancy forced a change in some values in the Standard Model for particle physics.
The understanding of neurons and the nervous system became increasingly precise and molecular during the 20th century.
For example, in 1952, Alan Lloyd Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley presented a mathematical model for transmission of electrical signals in neurons of the giant axon of a squid, which they called "action potentials", and how they are initiated and propagated, known as the Hodgkin–Huxley model.
In 1961–1962, Richard FitzHugh and J.
Nagumo simplified Hodgkin–Huxley, in what is called the FitzHugh–Nagumo model.
In 1962, Bernard Katz modeled neurotransmission across the space between neurons known as synapses.
Beginning in 1966, Eric Kandel and collaborators examined biochemical changes in neurons associated with learning and memory storage in Aplysia.
In 1981 Catherine Morris and Harold Lecar combined these models in the Morris–Lecar model.
Such increasingly quantitative work gave rise to numerous biological neuron models and models of neural computation.
Neuroscience began to be recognized as a distinct academic discipline in its own right.
Eric Kandel and collaborators have cited David Rioch, Francis O.
Schmitt, and Stephen Kuffler as having played critical roles in establishing the field.
Geologists' embrace of plate tectonics became part of a broadening of the field from a study of rocks into a study of the Earth as a planet.
Other elements of this transformation include: geophysical studies of the interior of the Earth, the grouping of geology with meteorology and oceanography as one of the "earth sciences", and comparisons of Earth and the solar system's other rocky planets.
In terms of applications, a massive number of new technologies were developed in the 20th century.
Technologies such as electricity, the incandescent light bulb, the automobile and the phonograph, first developed at the end of the 19th century, were perfected and universally deployed.
The first car was introduced by Karl Benz in 1885.
The first airplane flight occurred in 1903, and by the end of the century airliners flew thousands of miles in a matter of hours.
The development of the radio, television and computers caused massive changes in the dissemination of information.
Advances in biology also led to large increases in food production, as well as the elimination of diseases such as polio by Dr.
Gene mapping and gene sequencing, invented by Drs.
Mark Skolnik and Walter Gilbert, respectively, are the two technologies that made the Human Genome Project feasible.
Computer science, built upon a foundation of theoretical linguistics, discrete mathematics, and electrical engineering, studies the nature and limits of computation.
Subfields include computability, computational complexity, database design, computer networking, artificial intelligence, and the design of computer hardware.
One area in which advances in computing have contributed to more general scientific development is by facilitating large-scale archiving of scientific data.
Contemporary computer science typically distinguishes itself by emphasizing mathematical 'theory' in contrast to the practical emphasis of software engineering.
Einstein's paper "On the Quantum Theory of Radiation" outlined the principles of the stimulated emission of photons.
This led to the invention of the Laser (light amplification by the stimulated emission of radiation) and the optical amplifier which ushered in the Information Age.
It is optical amplification that allows fiber optic networks to transmit the massive capacity of the Internet.
Based on wireless transmission of electromagnetic radiation and global networks of cellular operation, the mobile phone became a primary means to access the internet.
In political science during the 20th century, the study of ideology, behaviouralism and international relations led to a multitude of 'pol-sci' subdisciplines including rational choice theory, voting theory, game theory (also used in economics), psephology, political geography/geopolitics, political anthropology/political psychology/political sociology, political economy, policy analysis, public administration, comparative political analysis and peace studies/conflict analysis.
In economics, John Maynard Keynes prompted a division between microeconomics and macroeconomics in the 1920s.
Under Keynesian economics macroeconomic trends can overwhelm economic choices made by individuals.
Governments should promote aggregate demand for goods as a means to encourage economic expansion.
Following World War II, Milton Friedman created the concept of monetarism.
Monetarism focuses on using the supply and demand of money as a method for controlling economic activity.
In the 1970s, monetarism has adapted into supply-side economics which advocates reducing taxes as a means to increase the amount of money available for economic expansion.
Other modern schools of economic thought are New Classical economics and New Keynesian economics.
New Classical economics was developed in the 1970s, emphasizing solid microeconomics as the basis for macroeconomic growth.
New Keynesian economics was created partially in response to New Classical economics.
It shows how imperfect competition and market rigidities, means monetary policy has real effects, and enables analysis of different policies.
Psychology in the 20th century saw a rejection of Freud's theories as being too unscientific, and a reaction against Edward Titchener's atomistic approach of the mind.
This led to the formulation of behaviorism by John B.
Watson, which was popularized by B.
Behaviorism proposed epistemologically limiting psychological study to overt behavior, since that could be reliably measured.
Scientific knowledge of the "mind" was considered too metaphysical, hence impossible to achieve.
The final decades of the 20th century have seen the rise of cognitive science, which considers the mind as once again a subject for investigation, using the tools of psychology, linguistics, computer science, philosophy, and neurobiology.
New methods of visualizing the activity of the brain, such as PET scans and CAT scans, began to exert their influence as well, leading some researchers to investigate the mind by investigating the brain, rather than cognition.
These new forms of investigation assume that a wide understanding of the human mind is possible, and that such an understanding may be applied to other research domains, such as artificial intelligence.
Evolutionary theory was applied to behavior and introduced to anthropology and psychology, through the works of cultural anthropologist Napoleon Chagnon.
Physical anthropology would become biological anthropology, incorporating elements of evolutionary biology.
American sociology in the 1940s and 1950s was dominated largely by Talcott Parsons, who argued that aspects of society that promoted structural integration were therefore "functional".
This structural functionalism approach was questioned in the 1960s, when sociologists came to see this approach as merely a justification for inequalities present in the status quo.
In reaction, conflict theory was developed, which was based in part on the philosophies of Karl Marx.
Conflict theorists saw society as an arena in which different groups compete for control over resources.
Symbolic interactionism also came to be regarded as central to sociological thinking.
Erving Goffman saw social interactions as a stage performance, with individuals preparing "backstage" and attempting to control their audience through impression management.
While these theories are currently prominent in sociological thought, other approaches exist, including feminist theory, post-structuralism, rational choice theory, and postmodernism.
In the mid-20th century, much of the methodologies of earlier anthropological and ethnographical study were reevaluated with an eye towards research ethics, while at the same time the scope of investigation has broadened far beyond the traditional study of "primitive cultures".
In the early 21st century, some concepts that originated in 20th century physics were proven.
On 4 July 2012, physicists working at CERN's Large Hadron Collider announced that they had discovered a new subatomic particle greatly resembling the Higgs boson, confirmed as such by the following March.
Gravitational waves were first detected by astronomers at the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory on 14 September 2015.
One of the first direct images of a black hole, taken by the Event Horizon Telescope in April of 2017, was released to the public on April 10, 2019.
The Human Genome Project was declared complete in 2003.
The CRISPR gene editing technique developed in 2012 allowed scientists to precisely and easily modify DNA in living organisms and led to the development of new medicine.
Advances in synthetic biology with computer assistance led to the creation of artificial microbial life, such as JCVI-syn3.
Positive psychology is a branch of psychology founded in 1998 by Martin Seligman that is concerned with the study of happiness, mental well-being, and positive human functioning, and is a reaction to 20th century psychology's emphasis on mental illness and dysfunction.
Starting around 2011, a replication crisis affected some branches of the social sciences.
The Landmarks of Science.
ISBN 978-0-8160-2137-6.
The Oxford Companion to the History of Modern Science.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-511229-0.
Needham, Joseph; Wang, Ling (1954).
Introductory Orientations.
Science and Civilisation in China.
Cambridge University Press.
Needham, Joseph (1986a).
Mathematics and the Sciences of the Heavens and the Earth.
Science and Civilisation in China.
Taipei: Caves Books Ltd.
Needham, Joseph (1986c).
Physics and Physical Technology, Part 2, Mechanical Engineering.
Science and Civilisation in China.
Taipei: Caves Books Ltd.
Needham, Joseph; Robinson, Kenneth G.
Science and Chinese society.
Science and Civilisation in China.
Cambridge University Press.
Sambursky, Shmuel (1974).
Physical Thought from the Presocratics to the Quantum Physicists: an anthology selected, introduced and edited by Shmuel Sambursky.
ISBN 978-0-87663-712-8.
Strathern, Paul (2023).
The Other Renaissance: From Copernicus to Shakespeare: How the Renaissance in Northern Europe Transformed the World.
New York: Pegasus Books.
ISBN 978-1-63936-393-3.
Wootton, David (2015).
The Invention of Science: A New History of the Scientific Revolution.
New York: Harper, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers.
ISBN 978-0-06-175952-9.
Fieser, James; Dowden, Bradley (eds.
Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
History of Science Digital Collection: Utah State University – Contains primary sources by such major figures in the history of scientific inquiry as Otto Brunfels, Charles Darwin, Erasmus Darwin, Carolus Linnaeus Antony van Leeuwenhoek, Jan Swammerdam, James Sowerby, Andreas Vesalius, and others.
The official site of the Nobel Foundation.
The Vega Science Trust Free to view videos of scientists including Feynman, Perutz, Rotblat, Born and many Nobel Laureates.
Geography (from Ancient Greek γεωγραφία geōgraphía; combining gê 'Earth' and gráphō 'write', lit.
Geography is an all-encompassing discipline that seeks an understanding of Earth and its human and natural complexities—not merely where objects are, but also how they have changed and come to be.
While geography is specific to Earth, many concepts can be applied more broadly to other celestial bodies in the field of planetary science.
Geography has been called "a bridge between natural science and social science disciplines.
The history of geography as a discipline spans cultures and millennia, having been independently developed by multiple groups and cross-pollinated through trade between them.
Geography as a discipline dates back to the earliest attempts to understand the world spatially, with the earliest example of an attempted world map dating to the 9th century BC in ancient Babylon.
Origins of many of the concepts in geography can be traced to Greek Eratosthenes of Cyrene, who may have coined the term "geographia" (c.
The first recorded use of the word γεωγραφία was as the title of a book by Greek scholar Claudius Ptolemy (100 – 170 AD).
During the Middle Ages, geography was influenced by Islamic scholars, such as Muhammad al-Idrisi, producing detailed maps of the world.
The Age of Discovery was influential in the development of geography, as European explorers mapped the New World.
Modern developments include geomatics and geographic information science.
The core concepts of geography that are consistent across all approaches are space, place, time, and scale.
Today, geography is an extremely broad discipline with multiple approaches and modalities.
The main branches of geography are physical geography, human geography, and technical geography.
Physical geography focuses on the natural environment, human geography on how humans interact with the Earth, and technical geography on developing tools for understanding geography.
Techniques employed can generally be broken down into quantitative and qualitative approaches, with many studies taking mixed-methods approaches.
Common techniques include cartography, remote sensing, interviews, and surveying.
Geography is a systematic study of the Earth (other celestial bodies are specified, such as "geography of Mars", or given another name, such as areography in the case of Mars, or selenography in the case of the Moon, or planetography for the general case), its features, and phenomena that take place on it.
For something to fall into the domain of geography, it generally needs some spatial component that can be placed on a map, such as coordinates, place names, or addresses.
This has led to geography being associated with cartography and place names.
Although many geographers are trained in toponymy and cartology, this is not their main preoccupation.
Geographers study the Earth's spatial and temporal distribution of phenomena, processes, and features as well as the interaction of humans and their environment.
Because space and place affect a variety of topics, such as economics, health, climate, plants, and animals, geography is highly interdisciplinary.
The interdisciplinary nature of the geographical approach depends on attentiveness to the relationships among physical and human phenomena and their spatial patterns.
While narrowing down geography to a few key concepts is extremely challenging and subject to tremendous debate within the discipline, several sources have approached the topic.
The 1st edition of the book "Key Concepts in Geography" broke down this into chapters focusing on "Space," "Place," "Time," "Scale," and "Landscape.
Another approach used extensively in teaching geography is the Five themes of geography established by "Guidelines for Geographic Education: Elementary and Secondary Schools," published jointly by the National Council for Geographic Education and the Association of American Geographers in 1984.
These themes are Location, place, relationships within places (often summarized as Human-Environment Interaction), movement, and regions.
The five themes of geography have shaped how American education approaches the topic in the years since.
Just as all phenomena exist in time and thus have a history, they also exist in space and have a geography.
For something to exist in the realm of geography, it must be able to be described spatially.
Thus, space is the most fundamental concept at the foundation of geography.
The concept is so basic, that geographers often have difficulty defining exactly what it is.
Absolute space is the exact site, or spatial coordinates, of objects, persons, places, or phenomena under investigation.
Absolute space leads to the view of the world as a photograph, with everything frozen in place when the coordinates were recorded.
Today, geographers are trained to recognize the world as a dynamic space where all processes interact, rather than as a static image on a map.
Place is one of the most complex and important terms in geography.
In human geography, place is the synthesis of the coordinates on the Earth's surface, the activity and use that occurs, has occurred, and will occur at the coordinates, and the meaning ascribed to the space by human individuals and groups.
This can be extraordinarily complex, as different spaces may have different uses at different times and mean different things to different people.
In physical geography, a place encompasses all the physical phenomena occurring in space, including the lithosphere, atmosphere, hydrosphere, and biosphere.
Places do not exist in a vacuum and instead have complex spatial relationships with each other, and place is concerned how a location is situated in relation to all other locations.
As a discipline then, the term place in geography includes all spatial phenomena occurring at a location, the diverse uses and meanings humans ascribe to that location, and how that location impacts and is impacted by all other locations on Earth.
In one of Yi-Fu Tuan's papers, he explains that in his view, geography is the study of Earth as a home for humanity, and thus place and the complex meaning behind the term are central to the discipline of geography.
Time is usually considered within the domain of history; however, it is a significant concern in geography.
In physics, space and time are not separated, and are combined into the concept of spacetime.
Geography is subject to the laws of physics, and when studying phenomena in space, time must be taken into account.
Time in geography is more than just the historical record of events at discrete coordinates; it also includes modeling the dynamic movement of people, organisms, and things through space.
Time facilitates movement through space, ultimately allowing things to flow through a system.
The amount of time an individual, or group of people, spends in a place will often shape their attachment and perspective to that place.
Time constrains the possible paths that can be taken through space, given a starting point, possible routes, and rate of travel.
Visualizing time over space is challenging in terms of cartography, and includes Space-Prism, advanced 3D geovisualizations, and animated maps.
Scale in the context of a map is the ratio between a distance measured on the map and the corresponding distance as measured on the ground.
This concept is fundamental to the discipline of geography, not just cartography, in that phenomena being investigated appear different depending on the scale used.
Scale is the frame that geographers use to measure space, and ultimately to understand a place.
During the quantitative revolution, geography shifted to an empirical law-making (nomothetic) approach.
Several laws of geography have been proposed since then, most notably by Waldo Tobler and can be viewed as a product of the quantitative revolution.
In general, some dispute the entire concept of laws in geography and the social sciences.
These criticisms have been addressed by Tobler and others, such as Michael Frank Goodchild.
However, this is an ongoing source of debate in geography and is unlikely to be resolved anytime soon.
Several laws have been proposed, and Tobler's first law of geography is the most generally accepted in geography.
Some have argued that geographic laws do not need to be numbered.
The existence of a first invites a second, and many have proposed themselves as that.
It has also been proposed that Tobler's first law of geography should be moved to the second and replaced with another.
Tobler's first law of geography: "Everything is related to everything else, but near things are more related than distant.
Tobler's second law of geography: "The phenomenon external to a geographic area of interest affects what goes on inside.
Arbia's law of geography: "Everything is related to everything else, but things observed at a coarse spatial resolution are more related than things observed at a finer resolution.
Spatial heterogeneity: Geographic variables exhibit uncontrolled variance.
The uncertainty principle: "That the geographic world is infinitely complex and that any representation must therefore contain elements of uncertainty, that many definitions used in acquiring geographic data contain elements of vagueness, and that it is impossible to measure location on the Earth's surface exactly.
Additionally, several variations or amendments to these laws have been proposed in the literature, though they are less well supported.
For example, one paper proposed an amended version of Tobler's first law of geography, referred to in the text as the Tobler–von Thünen law, which states: "Everything is related to everything else, but near things are more related than distant things, as a consequence of accessibility.
Geography is a branch of inquiry that focuses on spatial information on Earth.
It is an extremely broad topic and can be broken down in multiple ways.
There have been several approaches to doing this spanning at least several centuries, including "four traditions of geography" and into distinct branches.
The Four traditions of geography are often used to divide the different historical approach theories geographers have taken to the discipline.
In contrast, geography's branches describe contemporary applied geographical approaches.
Geography is an extremely broad field.
Because of this, many view the various definitions of geography proposed over the decades as inadequate.
To address this, William D.
Pattison proposed the concept of the "Four traditions of Geography" in 1964.
These traditions are the Spatial or Locational Tradition, the Man-Land or Human-Environment Interaction Tradition (sometimes referred to as Integrated geography), the Area Studies or Regional Tradition, and the Earth Science Tradition.
These concepts are broad sets of geography philosophies bound together within the discipline.
They are one of many ways in which geographers organize the major sets of thought and philosophy within the discipline.
In another approach to the abovementioned four traditions, geography is organized into applied branches.
The UNESCO Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems organizes geography into the three categories of human geography, physical geography, and technical geography.
Some publications limit the number of branches to physical and human, describing them as the principal branches.
Human geography largely focuses on the built environment and how humans create, view, manage, and influence space.
Physical geography examines the natural environment and how organisms, climate, soil, water, and landforms produce and interact, studying spatial patterns in the natural environment, atmosphere, hydrosphere, biosphere, and geosphere.
The difference between these approaches led to the development of integrated geography, which combines physical and human geography and concerns the interactions between the environment and humans.
Technical geography involves studying and developing the tools and techniques used by geographers, such as remote sensing, cartography, and geographic information system.
It is the newest of the branches, and often other terms are used in the literature to describe the emerging category.
While human and physical geographers use the techniques employed by technical geographers, technical geography is more concerned with the fundamental spatial concepts and technologies than with the nature of the data.
It is therefore closely associated with the spatial tradition of geography while being applied to the other two major branches.
These branches use similar geographic philosophies, concepts, and tools, and often overlap significantly, so geographers rarely focus on just one topic; they often use one as their primary focus and then incorporate data and methods from the other branches.
Often, geographers are asked to describe what they do by individuals outside the discipline and are likely to identify closely with a specific branch, or sub-branch, when describing themselves to lay people.
Physical geography (or physiography) focuses on geography as an Earth science.
It aims to understand the physical problems and the issues of lithosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere, pedosphere, and global flora and fauna patterns (biosphere).
Physical geography is the study of earth's seasons, climate, atmosphere, soil, streams, landforms, and oceans.
Physical geographers will often work in identifying and monitoring the use of natural resources.
Human geography (or anthropogeography) is a branch of geography that studies the patterns and processes that shape human society.
It encompasses the human, political, cultural, social, and economic aspects.
In industry, human geographers often work in city planning, public health, or business analysis.
Various approaches to the study of human geography have also arisen through time and include behavioral geography, culture theory, feminist geography, and geosophy.
Human geographers study people and their communities, cultures, economies, and environmental interactions by studying their relations with and across space and place.
Technical geography involves studying and developing tools, techniques, and statistical methods for collecting, analysing, using, and understanding spatial data.
Technical geography is the most recently recognized, and controversial, of the branches.
Its use dates back to 1749, when a book published by Edward Cave organized the discipline into a section containing content such as cartographic techniques and globes.
There are several other terms, often used interchangeably with technical geography to subdivide the discipline, including "techniques of geographic analysis," "Geographic Information Technology," "Geography method's and techniques," "Geographic Information Science," "geoinformatics," "geomatics," and "information geography".
There are subtle differences between each concept and term; however, technical geography is one of the broadest, consistent with the naming convention of the other two branches, has been in use since the 1700s, and has been used by the UNESCO Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems to divide geography into themes.
As academic fields increasingly specialize in their nature, technical geography has emerged as a branch of geography specializing in geographic methods and thought.
The emergence of technical geography has brought new relevance to the broad discipline of geography by serving as a set of unique methods for managing the interdisciplinary nature of the phenomena under investigation.
A technical geographer might work as a GIS analyst, a GIS developer creating new software tools, or a cartographer creating general reference maps incorporating human and natural features.
All geographic research and analysis start with asking the question "where," followed by "why there.
As spatial interrelationships are key to this synoptic science, maps are a key tool.
Classical cartography has been joined by a more modern approach to geographical analysis, computer-based geographic information systems (GIS).
Analytical – Asks why we find features and populations in a specific geographic area.
Descriptive – Specifies the locations of features and populations.
Regional – Examines systematic relationships between categories for a specific region or location on the planet.
Systematic – Groups geographical knowledge into categories that can be explored globally.
Quantitative methods in geography became particularly influential in the discipline during the quantitative revolution of the 1950s and 60s.
These methods revitalized the discipline in many ways, allowing scientific testing of hypotheses and proposing scientific geographic theories and laws.
The quantitative revolution heavily influenced and revitalized technical geography, and lead to the development of the subfield of quantitative geography.
Cartography is the art, science, and technology of making maps.
Cartographers study the Earth's surface representation with abstract symbols (map making).
Although other subdisciplines of geography rely on maps to present their analyses, the actual making of maps is sufficiently abstract to be regarded as a separate activity.
Cartography has grown from a collection of drafting techniques into an actual science.
Cartographers must learn cognitive psychology and ergonomics to understand which symbols convey information about the Earth most effectively, and behavioural psychology to induce readers of their maps to act on that information.
They must learn geodesy and fairly advanced mathematics to understand how the shape of the Earth affects the distortion of map symbols projected onto a flat surface for viewing.
It can be said, without much controversy, that cartography is the seed from which the larger field of geography grew.
Geographic information systems (GIS) store information about the Earth for accurate, automated retrieval by a computer, appropriate to the information's purpose.
In addition to all of the other subdisciplines of geography, GIS specialists must understand computer science and database systems.
GIS has revolutionized the field of cartography: nearly all mapmaking is now done with the assistance of some form of GIS software.
The science of using GIS software and GIS techniques to represent, analyse, and predict the spatial relationships is called geographic information science (GISc).
Remote sensing is the art, science, and technology of obtaining information about Earth's features from measurements made at a distance.
Remotely sensed data can be either passive, such as traditional photography, or active, such as LiDAR.
A variety of platforms can be used for remote sensing, including satellite imagery, aerial photography (including consumer drones), and data obtained from hand-held sensors.
Products from remote sensing include Digital elevation model and cartographic base maps.
Geographers increasingly use remotely sensed data to obtain information about the Earth's land surface, ocean, and atmosphere, because it: (a) supplies objective information at a variety of spatial scales (local to global), (b) provides a synoptic view of the area of interest, (c) allows access to distant and inaccessible sites, (d) provides spectral information outside the visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum, and (e) facilitates studies of how features/areas change over time.
Remotely sensed data may be analyzed independently or in conjunction with other digital data layers (e.
Remote sensing aids in land use and land cover (LULC) mapping by helping determine what is naturally occurring on a piece of land and what human activities are taking place there.
Geostatistics deals with quantitative data analysis, specifically the application of a statistical methodology to the exploration of geographic phenomena.
Geostatistics is used extensively in a variety of fields, including hydrology, geology, petroleum exploration, weather analysis, urban planning, logistics, and epidemiology.
The mathematical basis for geostatistics derives from cluster analysis, linear discriminant analysis, and non-parametric statistical tests, and a variety of other subjects.
Applications of geostatistics rely heavily on geographic information systems, particularly for the interpolation (estimate) of unmeasured points.
Geographers are making notable contributions to quantitative methods.
Qualitative methods in geography are descriptive rather than numerical or statistical in nature.
They add context to concepts, and explore human concepts like beliefs and perspective that are difficult or impossible to quantify.
Human geography is much more likely to employ qualitative methods than physical geography.
Increasingly, technical geographers are attempting to employ GIS methods on qualitative datasets.
Qualitative cartography employs many of the same software and techniques as quantitative cartography.
It may be employed to inform on map practices, or to visualize perspectives and ideas that are not strictly quantitative in nature.
An example of a form of qualitative cartography is a Chorochromatic map of nominal data, such as land cover or dominant language group in an area.
Another example is a deep map, or maps that combine geography and storytelling to produce a product with greater information than a two-dimensional image of places, names, and topography.
This approach offers more inclusive strategies than more traditional cartographic approaches for connecting the complex layers that makeup places.
Human geographers use ethnographic research techniques.
In cultural geography, there is a tradition of employing qualitative research techniques, also used in anthropology and sociology.
Participant observation and in-depth interviews provide human geographers with qualitative data.
Geopoetics is an interdisciplinary approach that combines geography and poetry to explore the interconnectedness between humans, space, place, and the environment.
Geopoetics is employed as a mixed methods tool to explain the implications of geographic research.
It is often employed to address and communicate the implications of complex topics, such as the anthropocene.
Geographers employ interviews to gather data and acquire valuable understandings from individuals or groups regarding their encounters, outlooks, and opinions concerning spatial phenomena.
Interviews can be carried out through various mediums, including face-to-face interactions, phone conversations, online platforms, or written exchanges.
Geographers typically adopt a structured or semi-structured approach during interviews involving specific questions or discussion points when utilized for research purposes.
These questions are designed to extract focused information about the research topic while being flexible enough to allow participants to express their experiences and viewpoints, such as through open-ended questions.
The concept of geography is present in all cultures; therefore, the history of the discipline is a series of competing narratives, with concepts emerging at various points across space and time.
The oldest known world maps date back to ancient Babylon from the 9th century BC.
The best known Babylonian world map, however, is the Imago Mundi of 600 BC.
The map as reconstructed by Eckhard Unger shows Babylon on the Euphrates, surrounded by a circular landmass showing Assyria, Urartu, and several cities, in turn surrounded by a "bitter river" (Oceanus), with seven islands arranged around it so as to form a seven-pointed star.
The accompanying text mentions seven outer regions beyond the encircling ocean.
The descriptions of five of them have survived.
In contrast to the Imago Mundi, an earlier Babylonian world map dating back to the 9th century BC depicted Babylon as being further north from the center of the world, though it is not certain what that center was supposed to represent.
The ideas of Anaximander (c.
Anaximander is credited with the invention of the gnomon, the simple, yet efficient Greek instrument that allowed the early measurement of latitude.
Thales is also credited with the prediction of eclipses.
The foundations of geography can be traced to ancient, medieval, and early modern Chinese cultures.
The Greeks, who were the first to explore geography as both art and science, achieved this through Cartography, Philosophy, and Literature, or through Mathematics.
There is some debate about who first asserted that the Earth is spherical, with the credit going either to Parmenides or Pythagoras.
Anaxagoras was able to demonstrate that the profile of the Earth was circular by explaining eclipses.
However, he still believed that the Earth was a flat disk, as did many of his contemporaries.
One of the first estimates of the radius of the Earth was made by Eratosthenes.
The first rigorous system of latitude and longitude lines is credited to Hipparchus.
He employed a sexagesimal system that was derived from Babylonian mathematics.
The meridians were subdivided into 360°, with each degree further subdivided into 60 (minutes).
To measure longitude at different locations on Earth, he suggested using eclipses to determine the time difference between them.
The extensive mapping by the Romans as they explored new lands would later provide a high level of information for Ptolemy to construct detailed atlases.
He extended the work of Hipparchus, using a grid system on his maps and adopting a degree length of 56.
From the 3rd century onwards, Chinese methods of geographical study and the writing of geographical literature became much more comprehensive than those found in Europe at the time (until the 13th century).
Chinese geographers such as Liu An, Pei Xiu, Jia Dan, Shen Kuo, Fan Chengda, Zhou Daguan, and Xu Xiake wrote important treatises, yet by the 17th century advanced ideas and methods of Western-style geography were adopted in China.
During the Middle Ages, the fall of the Roman empire led to a shift in the evolution of geography from Europe to the Islamic world.
Muslim geographers such as Muhammad al-Idrisi produced detailed world maps (such as Tabula Rogeriana).
Other geographers such as Yaqut al-Hamawi, Abu Rayhan Biruni, Ibn Battuta, and Ibn Khaldun provided detailed accounts of their journeys and the geography of the regions they visited.
Turkish geographer Mahmud al-Kashgari drew a world map on a linguistic basis, and later so did Piri Reis (Piri Reis map).
Further, Islamic scholars translated and interpreted the earlier works of the Romans and the Greeks and established the House of Wisdom in Baghdad for this purpose.
Abū Zayd al-Balkhī, originally from Balkh, founded the "Balkhī school" of terrestrial mapping in Baghdad.
Suhrāb, a late tenth century Muslim geographer accompanied a book of geographical coordinates, with instructions for making a rectangular world map with equirectangular projection or cylindrical equidistant projection.
Abu Rayhan Biruni (976–1048) first described a polar equi-azimuthal equidistant projection of the celestial sphere.
He was regarded as the most skilled when it came to mapping cities and measuring the distances between them, which he did for many cities in the Middle East and the Indian subcontinent.
He often combined astronomical readings and mathematical equations to develop methods of pinpointing locations by recording degrees of latitude and longitude.
He also developed similar techniques for measuring the heights of mountains, the depths of the valleys, and the expanse of the horizon.
He also discussed human geography and the planetary habitability of the Earth.
He also calculated the latitude of Kath, Khwarezm, using the maximum altitude of the Sun, and solved a complex geodesic equation to accurately compute the Earth's circumference, which was close to modern values of the Earth's circumference.
His estimate of 6,339.
In contrast to his predecessors, who measured the Earth's circumference by sighting the Sun simultaneously from two different locations, al-Biruni developed a new method of using trigonometric calculations based on the angle between a plain and mountain top, which yielded more accurate measurements of the Earth's circumference, and made it possible for it to be measured by a single person from a single location.
The European Age of Discovery during the 16th and 17th centuries, where many new lands were discovered, and accounts by European explorers such as Christopher Columbus, Marco Polo, and James Cook revived a desire for both accurate geographic detail and more solid theoretical foundations in Europe.
In 1650, the first edition of the Geographia Generalis was published by Bernhardus Varenius, which was later edited and republished by others, including Isaac Newton.
This textbook sought to integrate new scientific discoveries and principles into classical geography and approach the discipline like the other sciences emerging, and is seen by some as the division between ancient and modern geography in the West.
The Geographia Generalis contained both theoretical background and practical applications related to ship navigation.
The remaining problem facing both explorers and geographers was finding the latitude and longitude of a geographic location.
While the problem of latitude was solved long ago, the problem of longitude remained; agreeing on which meridian should be zero was only part of the problem.
It was left to John Harrison to solve it by inventing the chronometer H-4 in 1760, and later in 1884 for the International Meridian Conference to adopt by convention the Greenwich meridian as zero meridians.
The 18th and 19th centuries were the periods when geography was recognized as a distinct academic discipline.
They became part of a typical university curriculum in Europe (especially Paris and Berlin).
The development of many geographic societies also occurred during the 19th century, with the foundations of the Société de Géographie in 1821, the Royal Geographical Society in 1830, Russian Geographical Society in 1845, American Geographical Society in 1851, the Royal Danish Geographical Society in 1876 and the National Geographic Society in 1888.
The influence of Immanuel Kant, Alexander von Humboldt, Carl Ritter, and Paul Vidal de la Blache can be seen as a major turning point in geography from philosophy to an academic subject.
Geographers such as Richard Hartshorne and Joseph Kerski have regarded both Humboldt and Ritter as the founders of modern geography, as Humboldt and Ritter were the first to establish geography as an independent scientific discipline.
Over the past two centuries, advancements in computer technology have led to the development of geomatics and to the incorporation of new practices, such as participant observation and geostatistics, into geography's portfolio of tools.
In the West during the 20th century, the discipline of geography went through four major phases: environmental determinism, regional geography, the quantitative revolution, and critical geography.
The strong interdisciplinary links between geography and the sciences of geology and botany, as well as economics, sociology, and demographics, have also grown greatly, especially as a result of earth system science that seeks to understand the world in a holistic view.
New concepts and philosophies have emerged from the rapid advances in computing, quantitative methods, and interdisciplinary approaches.
The 1962 book Theoretical Geography by William Bunge, which argued for a nomothetic approach to geography and that from a purely spatial perspective there was no real difference between human and physical geography, has been described by Kevin R.
Cox as "perhaps the seminal text of the spatial-quantitative revolution.
The disciplines of geography, especially physical geography, and geology have a significant overlap.
In the past, the two have often shared academic departments at universities, a point that has led to conflict over resources.
Both disciplines do seek to understand the rocks on the Earth's surface and the processes that change them over time.
Geology employs many of the tools and techniques of technical geographers, such as GIS and remote sensing to aid in geological mapping.
However, geology includes research that goes beyond the spatial component, such as the chemical analysis of rocks and biogeochemistry.
The discipline of history has a significant overlap with geography, especially human geography.
Like geology, history and geography have shared university departments.
Geography provides the spatial context within which historical events unfold.
The physical geographic features of a region, such as its landforms, climate, and resources, shape human settlements, trade routes, and economic activities, which in turn influence the course of historical events.
Thus, a historian must have a strong foundation in geography.
Historians employ the techniques of technical geographers to create historical atlases and maps.
While the discipline of geography is normally concerned with the Earth, the term can also be informally used to describe the study of other worlds, such as the planets of the Solar System and even beyond.
The study of systems larger than the Earth itself usually forms part of Astronomy or Cosmology, while the study of other planets is usually called planetary science.
Alternative terms such as areography (geography of Mars) have been employed to describe the study of other celestial objects.
Ultimately, geography may be considered a subdiscipline within planetary science, and planetary science links geography with fields like astronomy and physics.
Earth is the third planet from the Sun and the only astronomical object known to harbor life.
This is made possible by Earth being an ocean world, the only one in the Solar System sustaining liquid surface water.
Almost all of Earth's water is contained in its global ocean, covering 70.
Most of Earth's land is at least somewhat humid and covered by vegetation, while large ice sheets at Earth's polar deserts retain more water than Earth's groundwater, lakes, rivers, and atmospheric water combined.
Earth's crust consists of slowly moving tectonic plates, which interact to produce mountain ranges, volcanoes, and earthquakes.
Earth has a liquid outer core that generates a magnetosphere capable of deflecting most of the destructive solar winds and cosmic radiation.
Earth has a dynamic atmosphere, which sustains Earth's surface conditions and protects it from most meteoroids and UV-light at entry.
It is composed primarily of nitrogen and oxygen.
Water vapor is widely present in the atmosphere, forming clouds that cover most of the planet.
The water vapor acts as a greenhouse gas and, together with other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, particularly carbon dioxide (CO2), creates the conditions for both liquid surface water and water vapor to persist via the capturing of energy from the Sun's light.
This process maintains the current average surface temperature of 14.
Differences in the amount of captured energy between geographic regions (as with the equatorial region receiving more sunlight than the polar regions) drive atmospheric and ocean currents, producing a global climate system with different climate regions, and a range of weather phenomena such as precipitation, allowing components such as carbon and nitrogen to cycle.
Earth is rounded into an ellipsoid with a circumference of about 40,000 kilometers (24,900 miles).
It is the densest planet in the Solar System.
Of the four rocky planets, it is the largest and most massive.
Earth is about eight light-minutes (1 AU) away from the Sun and orbits it, taking a year (about 365.
Earth rotates around its own axis in slightly less than a day (in about 23 hours and 56 minutes).
Earth's axis of rotation is tilted with respect to the perpendicular to its orbital plane around the Sun, producing seasons.
Earth is orbited by one permanent natural satellite, the Moon, which orbits Earth at 384,400 km (238,855 mi)—1.
The Moon's gravity helps stabilize Earth's axis, causes tides and gradually slows Earth's rotation.
Likewise, Earth's gravitational pull has already made the Moon's rotation tidally locked, keeping the same near side facing Earth.
Earth, like most other bodies in the Solar System, formed about 4.
The formation of the ocean and the subsequent development of life occurred during the first billion years of Earth's history.
Life spread globally and has been altering Earth's atmosphere and surface, leading to the Great Oxidation Event two billion years ago.
Humans emerged 300,000 years ago in Africa and have spread across every continent on Earth.
Humans depend on Earth's biosphere and natural resources for their survival, but have increasingly impacted the planet's environment.
Humanity's current impact on Earth's climate and biosphere is unsustainable, threatening the livelihood of humans and many other forms of life, and causing widespread extinctions.
The Modern English word Earth developed, via Middle English, from an Old English noun most often spelled eorðe.
It has cognates in every Germanic language, from which Proto-Germanic *erþō has been reconstructed.
In its earliest attestation, the word eorðe was used to translate the many senses of Latin terra and Greek gē: the ground, its soil, dry land, the human world, the surface of the world (including the sea), and the globe itself.
As with Roman Terra (or Tellus) and Greek Gaia, Earth may have been a personified goddess in Germanic paganism: late Norse mythology included Jörð ('Earth'), a giantess often given as the mother of Thor.
Historically, Earth has been written in lowercase.
During the Early Middle English period, its definite sense as "the globe" began being expressed using the phrase the earth.
By the period of Early Modern English, capitalization of nouns began to prevail, and the earth was also written the Earth, particularly when referenced along with other heavenly bodies.
More recently, the name is sometimes simply given as Earth, by analogy with the names of the other planets, though earth and forms with the earth remain common.
House styles now vary: Oxford spelling recognizes the lowercase form as the more common, with the capitalized form an acceptable variant.
Another convention capitalizes Earth when appearing as a name, such as a description of the "Earth's atmosphere", but employs the lowercase when it is preceded by the, such as "the atmosphere of the earth".
It almost always appears in lowercase in colloquial expressions such as "what on earth are you doing?
The name Terra TERR-ə is occasionally used in scientific writing; it also sees use in science fiction to distinguish humanity's inhabited planet from others, while in poetry Tellus TELL-əs has been used to denote personification of the Earth.
Terra is also the name of the planet in some Romance languages, languages that evolved from Latin, like Italian and Portuguese, while in other Romance languages the word gave rise to names with slightly altered spellings, like the Spanish Tierra and the French Terre.
The Latinate form Gaea (English: DJEE-ə) of the Greek poetic name Gaia ([ɡâi̯.
There are a number of adjectives for the planet Earth.
The word earthly is derived from Earth.
From the Latin Terra comes terran TERR-ən, terrestrial tərr-EHST-ree-əl, and (via French) terrene tə-REEN, and from the Latin Tellus comes tellurian teh-LUURR-ee-ən and telluric.
The standard astronomical symbols of Earth are a quartered circle, , representing the four corners of the world, and a globus cruciger, .
The oldest material found in the Solar System is dated to 4.
The bodies in the Solar System formed and evolved with the Sun.
In theory, a solar nebula partitions a volume out of a molecular cloud by gravitational collapse, which begins to spin and flatten into a circumstellar disk, and then the planets grow out of that disk with the Sun.
A nebula contains gas, ice grains, and dust (including primordial nuclides).
According to nebular theory, planetesimals formed by accretion, with the primordial Earth being estimated as likely taking anywhere from 70 to 100 million years to form.
Estimates of the age of the Moon range from 4.
A leading hypothesis is that it was formed by accretion from material loosed from Earth after a Mars-sized object with about 10% of Earth's mass, named Theia, collided with Earth.
It hit Earth with a glancing blow and some of its mass merged with Earth.
Between approximately 4.
Earth's atmosphere and oceans were formed by volcanic activity and outgassing.
Water vapor from these sources condensed into the oceans, augmented by water and ice from asteroids, protoplanets, and comets.
Sufficient water to fill the oceans may have been on Earth since it formed.
In this model, atmospheric greenhouse gases kept the oceans from freezing when the newly forming Sun had only 70% of its current luminosity.
As the molten outer layer of Earth cooled it formed the first solid crust, which is thought to have been mafic in composition.
The first continental crust, which was more felsic in composition, formed by the partial melting of this mafic crust.
Hadean-aged zircon grains found in Western Australia, dating back as far as 4.
There are two main models of how this initial small volume of continental crust evolved to reach its current abundance: (1) a relatively steady growth up to the present day, which is supported by the radiometric dating of continental crust globally and (2) an initial rapid growth in the volume of continental crust during the Archean, forming the bulk of the continental crust that now exists, which is supported by isotopic evidence from hafnium in zircons and neodymium in sedimentary rocks.
The two models and the data that support them can be reconciled by large-scale recycling of the continental crust, particularly during the early stages of Earth's history.
New continental crust forms as a result of plate tectonics, a process ultimately driven by the continuous loss of heat from Earth's interior.
Over the period of hundreds of millions of years, tectonic forces have caused areas of continental crust to group together to form supercontinents that have subsequently broken apart.
At approximately 750 Ma, one of the earliest known supercontinents, Rodinia, began to break apart.
The continents later recombined to form Pannotia at 600–540 Ma, then finally Pangaea, which also began to break apart at 180 Ma.
The most recent pattern of ice ages began about 40 Ma, and then intensified during the Pleistocene about 3 Ma.
High- and middle-latitude regions have since undergone repeated cycles of glaciation and thaw, repeating about every 21,000, 41,000, and 100,000 years.
The Last Glacial Period, colloquially called the "last ice age", covered large parts of the continents, to the middle latitudes, in ice and ended about 11,700 years ago.
Chemical reactions led to the first self-replicating molecules about four billion years ago.
A half billion years later, the last common ancestor of all current life arose.
The evolution of photosynthesis allowed the Sun's energy to be harvested directly by life forms.
The resultant molecular oxygen (O2) accumulated in the atmosphere and due to interaction with ultraviolet solar radiation, formed a protective ozone layer (O3) in the upper atmosphere.
The incorporation of smaller cells within larger ones resulted in the development of complex cells called eukaryotes.
True multicellular organisms formed as cells within colonies became increasingly specialized.
Aided by the absorption of harmful ultraviolet radiation by the ozone layer, life colonized Earth's surface.
Among the earliest fossil evidence for life is microbial mat fossils found in 3.
The earliest direct evidence of life on Earth is contained in 3.
During the Neoproterozoic, 1000 to 539 Ma, much of Earth might have been covered in ice.
This hypothesis has been termed "Snowball Earth", and it is of particular interest because it preceded the Cambrian explosion, when multicellular life forms significantly increased in complexity.
Following the Cambrian explosion, 535 Ma, there have been at least five major mass extinctions and many minor ones.
Apart from the proposed current Holocene extinction event, the most recent was 66 Ma, when an asteroid impact triggered the extinction of non-avian dinosaurs and other large reptiles, but largely spared small animals, such as insects, mammals, lizards, and birds.
Mammalian life has diversified over the past 66 Mys, and several million years ago, an African ape species gained the ability to stand upright.
This facilitated tool use and encouraged communication that provided the nutrition and stimulation needed for a larger brain, which led to the evolution of humans.
The development of agriculture, and then civilization, led to humans having an influence on Earth and the nature and quantity of other life forms that continues to this day.
Earth's expected long-term future is tied to that of the Sun.
Earth's increasing surface temperature will accelerate the inorganic carbon cycle, possibly reducing CO2 concentration to levels lethally low for current plants (10 ppm for C4 photosynthesis) in approximately 100–900 million years.
A lack of vegetation would result in the loss of oxygen in the atmosphere, making current animal life impossible.
Due to the increased luminosity, Earth's mean temperature may reach 100 °C (212 °F) in 1.
Even if the Sun were stable and eternal, a significant fraction of the water in the modern oceans would descend into the mantle, due to reduced steam venting from mid-ocean ridges as the core of the Earth slowly cools.
The Sun will evolve to become a red giant in about 5 billion years.
Models predict that the Sun will expand to roughly 1 AU (150 million km; 93 million mi), about 250 times its present radius.
Earth's fate is less clear.
As a red giant, the Sun will lose roughly 30% of its mass, so, without tidal effects, Earth will move to an orbit 1.
Earth's mass is approximately 5.
It is composed mostly of iron (32.
Due to gravitational separation, the core is primarily composed of the denser elements: iron (88.
The most common rock constituents of the crust are oxides.
Over 99% of the crust is composed of various oxides of eleven elements, principally oxides containing silicon (the silicate minerals), aluminum, iron, calcium, magnesium, potassium, or sodium.
Earth has a rounded shape, through hydrostatic equilibrium, with an average diameter of 12,742 kilometers (7,918 mi), making it the fifth largest planetary sized and largest terrestrial object of the Solar System.
Due to Earth's rotation it has the shape of an ellipsoid, bulging at its equator; its diameter is 43 kilometers (27 mi) longer there than at its poles.
Earth's shape also has local topographic variations; the largest local variations, like the Mariana Trench (10,925 meters or 35,843 feet below local sea level), shortens Earth's average radius by 0.
Since Earth's surface is farthest out from its center of mass at its equatorial bulge, the summit of the volcano Chimborazo in Ecuador (6,384.
Parallel to the rigid land topography the ocean exhibits a more dynamic topography.
To measure the local variation of Earth's topography, geodesy employs an idealized Earth producing a geoid shape.
Such a shape is gained if the ocean is idealized, covering Earth completely and without any perturbations such as tides and winds.
The result is a smooth but irregular geoid surface, providing a mean sea level as a reference level for topographic measurements.
Earth's surface is the boundary between the atmosphere and the solid Earth and oceans.
Defined in this way, it has an area of about 510 million km2 (197 million sq mi).
Earth can be divided into two hemispheres: by latitude into the polar Northern and Southern hemispheres; or by longitude into the continental Eastern and Western hemispheres.
Earth's surface is continually being shaped by internal plate tectonic processes including earthquakes and volcanism; by weathering and erosion driven by ice, water, wind and temperature; and by biological processes including the growth and decomposition of biomass into soil.
Most of Earth's surface is ocean water: 70.
This vast pool of salty water is often called the world ocean, and makes Earth with its dynamic hydrosphere a water world or ocean world.
Indeed, in Earth's early history the ocean may have covered Earth completely.
The world ocean is commonly divided into the Pacific Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, Indian Ocean, Southern Ocean, and Arctic Ocean, from largest to smallest.
The ocean covers Earth's oceanic crust, with the shelf seas covering the shelves of the continental crust to a lesser extent.
The oceanic crust forms large oceanic basins with features like abyssal plains, seamounts, submarine volcanoes, oceanic trenches, submarine canyons, oceanic plateaus, and a globe-spanning mid-ocean ridge system.
At Earth's polar regions, the ocean surface is covered by seasonally variable amounts of sea ice that often connects with polar land, permafrost and ice sheets, forming polar ice caps.
Earth's land covers 29.
The land surface includes many islands around the globe, but most of the land surface is taken by the four continental landmasses, which are (in descending order): Africa-Eurasia, America, Antarctica, and Australia.
These landmasses are further broken down and grouped into the continents.
Land can be covered by surface water, snow, ice, artificial structures or vegetation.
Most of Earth's land hosts vegetation, but considerable amounts of land are ice sheets (10%, not including the equally large area of land under permafrost) or deserts (33%).
The pedosphere is the outermost layer of Earth's land surface and is composed of soil and subject to soil formation processes.
Soil is crucial for land to be arable.
Earth's total arable land is 10.
Earth has an estimated 16.
Earth's surface topography comprises both the topography of the ocean surface, and the shape of Earth's land surface.
The terrain of the land surface varies greatly and consists of mountains, deserts, plains, plateaus, and other landforms.
The elevation of the land surface varies from a low point of −418 m (−1,371 ft) at the Dead Sea, to a maximum altitude of 8,848 m (29,029 ft) at the top of Mount Everest.
The mean height of land above sea level is about 797 m (2,615 ft).
The submarine terrain of the ocean floor has an average bathymetric depth of 4 km, and is as varied as the terrain above sea level.
The land surface and the ocean floor form the top of Earth's crust, which together with parts of the upper mantle form Earth's lithosphere.
Earth's crust may be divided into oceanic and continental crust.
Beneath the ocean-floor sediments, the oceanic crust is predominantly basaltic, while the continental crust may include lower density materials such as granite, sediments and metamorphic rocks.
Nearly 75% of the continental surfaces are covered by sedimentary rocks, although they form about 5% of the mass of the crust.
Earth's mechanically rigid outer layer of Earth's crust and upper mantle, the lithosphere, is divided into tectonic plates.
These plates are rigid segments that move relative to each other at one of three boundaries types: at convergent boundaries, two plates come together; at divergent boundaries, two plates are pulled apart; and at transform boundaries, two plates slide past one another laterally.
Along these plate boundaries, earthquakes, volcanic activity, mountain-building, and oceanic trench formation can occur.
The tectonic plates ride on top of the asthenosphere, the solid but less-viscous part of the upper mantle that can flow and move along with the plates.
As the tectonic plates migrate, oceanic crust is subducted under the leading edges of the plates at convergent boundaries.
At the same time, the upwelling of mantle material at divergent boundaries creates mid-ocean ridges.
The combination of these processes recycles the oceanic crust back into the mantle.
Due to this recycling, most of the ocean floor is less than 100 Ma old.
The oldest oceanic crust is located in the Western Pacific and is estimated to be 200 Ma old.
By comparison, the oldest dated continental crust is 4,030 Ma, although zircons have been found preserved as clasts within Eoarchean sedimentary rocks that give ages up to 4,400 Ma, indicating that at least some continental crust existed at that time.
The seven major plates are the Pacific, North American, Eurasian, African, Antarctic, Indo-Australian, and South American.
Other notable plates include the Arabian Plate, the Caribbean Plate, the Nazca Plate off the west coast of South America and the Scotia Plate in the southern Atlantic Ocean.
The Australian Plate fused with the Indian Plate between 50 and 55 Ma.
The fastest-moving plates are the oceanic plates, with the Cocos Plate advancing at a rate of 75 mm/a (3.
At the other extreme, the slowest-moving plate is the South American Plate, progressing at a typical rate of 10.
Earth's interior, like that of the other terrestrial planets, is divided into layers by their chemical or physical (rheological) properties.
The outer layer is a chemically distinct silicate solid crust, which is underlain by a highly viscous solid mantle.
The crust is separated from the mantle by the Mohorovičić discontinuity.
The thickness of the crust varies from about 6 kilometers (3.
The crust and the cold, rigid, top of the upper mantle are collectively known as the lithosphere, which is divided into independently moving tectonic plates.
Beneath the lithosphere is the asthenosphere, a relatively low-viscosity layer on which the lithosphere rides.
Important changes in crystal structure within the mantle occur at 410 and 660 km (250 and 410 mi) below the surface, spanning a transition zone that separates the upper and lower mantle.
Beneath the mantle, an extremely low viscosity liquid outer core lies above a solid inner core.
Earth's inner core may be rotating at a slightly higher angular velocity than the remainder of the planet, advancing by 0.
The radius of the inner core is about one-fifth of that of Earth.
The density increases with depth.
Among the Solar System's planetary-sized objects, Earth is the object with the highest density.
The major contributors to Earth's internal heat are primordial heat (heat left over from Earth's formation) and radiogenic heat (heat produced by radioactive decay).
The major heat-producing isotopes within Earth are potassium-40, uranium-238, and thorium-232.
At the center, the temperature may be up to 6,000 °C (10,830 °F), and the pressure could reach 360 GPa (52 million psi).
Because much of the heat is provided by radioactive decay, scientists postulate that early in Earth's history, before isotopes with short half-lives were depleted, Earth's heat production was much higher.
At approximately 3 Gyr, twice the present-day heat would have been produced, increasing the rates of mantle convection and plate tectonics, and allowing the production of uncommon igneous rocks such as komatiites that are rarely formed today.
The mean heat loss from Earth is 87 mW/m2, for a global heat loss of 4.
A portion of the core's thermal energy is transported toward the crust by mantle plumes, a form of convection consisting of upwellings of higher-temperature rock.
These plumes can produce hotspots and flood basalts.
More of the heat in Earth is lost through plate tectonics, by mantle upwelling associated with mid-ocean ridges.
The final major mode of heat loss is through conduction through the lithosphere, the majority of which occurs under the oceans.
The main part of Earth's magnetic field is generated in the core, the site of a dynamo process that converts the kinetic energy of thermally and compositionally driven convection into electrical and magnetic field energy.
The field extends outwards from the core, through the mantle, and up to Earth's surface, where it is approximately a dipole.
The poles of the dipole are located close to Earth's geographic poles.
At the equator of the magnetic field, the magnetic-field strength at the surface is 3.
The convection movements in the core are chaotic; the magnetic poles drift and periodically change alignment.
This causes secular variation of the main field and field reversals at irregular intervals averaging a few times every million years.
The most recent reversal occurred approximately 700,000 years ago.
The extent of Earth's magnetic field in space defines the magnetosphere.
Ions and electrons of the solar wind are deflected by the magnetosphere; solar wind pressure compresses the day-side of the magnetosphere, to about 10 Earth radii, and extends the night-side magnetosphere into a long tail.
Because the velocity of the solar wind is greater than the speed at which waves propagate through the solar wind, a supersonic bow shock precedes the day-side magnetosphere within the solar wind.
Charged particles are contained within the magnetosphere; the plasmasphere is defined by low-energy particles that essentially follow magnetic field lines as Earth rotates.
The ring current is defined by medium-energy particles that drift relative to the geomagnetic field, but with paths that are still dominated by the magnetic field, and the Van Allen radiation belts are formed by high-energy particles whose motion is essentially random, but contained in the magnetosphere.
During magnetic storms and substorms, charged particles can be deflected from the outer magnetosphere and especially the magnetotail, directed along field lines into Earth's ionosphere, where atmospheric atoms can be excited and ionized, causing an aurora.
Earth's hydrosphere is the sum of Earth's water and its distribution.
Most of Earth's hydrosphere consists of Earth's global ocean.
Earth's hydrosphere also consists of water in the atmosphere and on land, including clouds, inland seas, lakes, rivers, and underground waters.
The mass of the oceans is approximately 1.
The oceans cover an area of 361.
If all of Earth's crustal surface were at the same elevation as a smooth sphere, the depth of the resulting world ocean would be 2.
Most fresh water, about 68.
The remaining 30% is ground water, 1% surface water (covering only 2.
In Earth's coldest regions, snow survives over the summer and changes into ice.
This accumulated snow and ice eventually forms into glaciers, bodies of ice that flow under the influence of their own gravity.
Alpine glaciers form in mountainous areas, whereas vast ice sheets form over land in polar regions.
The flow of glaciers erodes the surface, changing it dramatically, with the formation of U-shaped valleys and other landforms.
Sea ice in the Arctic covers an area about as big as the United States, although it is quickly retreating as a consequence of climate change.
The average salinity of Earth's oceans is about 35 grams of salt per kilogram of seawater (3.
Most of this salt was released from volcanic activity or extracted from cool igneous rocks.
The oceans are also a reservoir of dissolved atmospheric gases, which are essential for the survival of many aquatic life forms.
Sea water has an important influence on the world's climate, with the oceans acting as a large heat reservoir.
Shifts in the oceanic temperature distribution can cause significant weather shifts, such as the El Niño–Southern Oscillation.
The abundance of water, particularly liquid water, on Earth's surface is a unique feature that distinguishes it from other planets in the Solar System.
Solar System planets with considerable atmospheres do partly host atmospheric water vapor, but they lack surface conditions for stable surface water.
Despite some moons showing signs of large reservoirs of extraterrestrial liquid water, with possibly even more volume than Earth's ocean, all of them are large bodies of water under a kilometers-thick frozen surface layer.
The atmospheric pressure at Earth's sea level averages 101.
A dry atmosphere is composed of 78.
Water vapor content varies between 0.
Clouds cover around two-thirds of Earth's surface, more so over oceans than land.
The height of the troposphere varies with latitude, ranging between 8 km (5 mi) at the poles to 17 km (11 mi) at the equator, with some variation resulting from weather and seasonal factors.
Earth's biosphere has significantly altered its atmosphere.
Oxygenic photosynthesis evolved 2.
This change enabled the proliferation of aerobic organisms and, indirectly, the formation of the ozone layer due to the subsequent conversion of atmospheric O2 into O3.
The ozone layer blocks ultraviolet solar radiation, permitting life on land.
Other atmospheric functions important to life include transporting water vapor, providing useful gases, causing small meteors to burn up before they strike the surface, and moderating temperature.
This last phenomenon is the greenhouse effect: trace molecules within the atmosphere serve to capture thermal energy emitted from the surface, thereby raising the average temperature.
Water vapor, carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and ozone are the primary greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
Without this heat-retention effect, the average surface temperature would be −18 °C (−0.
The upper atmosphere, the atmosphere above the troposphere, is usually divided into the stratosphere, mesosphere, and thermosphere.
Each layer has a different lapse rate, defining the rate of change in temperature with height.
Beyond these, the exosphere thins out into the magnetosphere, where the geomagnetic fields interact with the solar wind.
Within the stratosphere is the ozone layer, a component that partially shields the surface from ultraviolet light and thus is important for life on Earth.
The Kármán line, defined as 100 km (62 mi) above Earth's surface, is a working definition for the boundary between the atmosphere and outer space.
Thermal energy causes some of the molecules at the outer edge of the atmosphere to increase their velocity to the point where they can escape from Earth's gravity.
This causes a slow but steady loss of the atmosphere into space.
Because unfixed hydrogen has a low molecular mass, it can achieve escape velocity more readily, and it leaks into outer space at a greater rate than other gases.
The leakage of hydrogen into space contributes to the shifting of Earth's atmosphere and surface from an initially reducing state to its current oxidizing one.
Photosynthesis provided a source of free oxygen, but the loss of reducing agents such as hydrogen is thought to have been a necessary precondition for the widespread accumulation of oxygen in the atmosphere.
Hence the ability of hydrogen to escape from the atmosphere may have influenced the nature of life that developed on Earth.
In the current, oxygen-rich atmosphere most hydrogen is converted into water before it has an opportunity to escape.
Instead, most of the hydrogen loss comes from the destruction of methane in the upper atmosphere.
Earth receives 1361 W/m2 of solar irradiance.
The amount of solar energy that reaches Earth's surface decreases with increasing latitude.
At higher latitudes, the sunlight reaches the surface at lower angles, and it must pass through thicker columns of the atmosphere.
As a result, the mean annual air temperature at sea level decreases by about 0.
Earth's surface can be subdivided into specific latitudinal belts of approximately homogeneous climate.
Ranging from the equator to the polar regions, these are the tropical (or equatorial), subtropical, temperate and polar climates.
Earth's atmosphere has no definite boundary, gradually becoming thinner and fading into outer space.
Three-quarters of the atmosphere's mass is contained within the first 11 km (6.
Energy from the Sun heats this layer, and the surface below, causing expansion of the air.
This lower-density air then rises and is replaced by cooler, higher-density air.
The result is atmospheric circulation that drives the weather and climate through redistribution of thermal energy.
The primary atmospheric circulation bands consist of the trade winds in the equatorial region below 30° latitude and the westerlies in the mid-latitudes between 30° and 60°.
Ocean heat content and currents are also important factors in determining climate, particularly the thermohaline circulation that distributes thermal energy from the equatorial oceans to the polar regions.
Water vapor generated through surface evaporation is transported by circulatory patterns in the atmosphere.
When atmospheric conditions permit an uplift of warm, humid air, this water condenses and falls to the surface as precipitation.
Most of the water is then transported to lower elevations by river systems and usually returned to the oceans or deposited into lakes.
This water cycle is a vital mechanism for supporting life on land and is a primary factor in the erosion of surface features over geological periods.
Precipitation patterns vary widely, ranging from several meters of water per year to less than a millimeter.
Atmospheric circulation, topographic features, and temperature differences determine the average precipitation that falls in each region.
Further factors that affect a location's climates are its proximity to oceans, the oceanic and atmospheric circulation, and topology.
Places close to oceans typically have colder summers and warmer winters, due to the fact that oceans can store large amounts of heat.
The wind transports the cold or the heat of the ocean to the land.
Atmospheric circulation also plays an important role: San Francisco and Washington DC are both coastal cities at about the same latitude.
San Francisco's climate is significantly more moderate as the prevailing wind direction is from sea to land.
Finally, temperatures decrease with height causing mountainous areas to be colder than low-lying areas.
The commonly used Köppen climate classification system has five broad groups (humid tropics, arid, humid middle latitudes, continental and cold polar), which are further divided into more specific subtypes.
The Köppen system rates regions based on observed temperature and precipitation.
Surface air temperature can rise to around 55 °C (131 °F) in hot deserts, such as Death Valley, and can fall as low as −89 °C (−128 °F) in Antarctica.
Earth's rotation period relative to the Sun—its mean solar day—is 86,400 seconds of mean solar time (86,400.
Because Earth's solar day is now slightly longer than it was during the 19th century due to tidal deceleration, each day varies between 0 and 2 ms longer than the mean solar day.
Earth's rotation period relative to the fixed stars, called its stellar day by the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS), is 86,164.
Earth's rotation period relative to the precessing or moving mean March equinox (when the Sun is at 90° on the equator), is 86,164.
Thus the sidereal day is shorter than the stellar day by about 8.
Apart from meteors within the atmosphere and low-orbiting satellites, the main apparent motion of celestial bodies in Earth's sky is to the west at a rate of 15°/h = 15'/min.
For bodies near the celestial equator, this is equivalent to an apparent diameter of the Sun or the Moon every two minutes; from Earth's surface, the apparent sizes of the Sun and the Moon are approximately the same.
Earth orbits the Sun at an average distance is about 150 million km (93 million mi).
This makes Earth the third-closest planet to the Sun and part of the inner Solar System.
Its orbital distance is the basis for the astronomical unit (AU) and is equal to roughly 8.
Earth orbits the Sun every 365.
With an apparent movement of the Sun in Earth's sky at a rate of about 1°/day eastward, which is one apparent Sun or Moon diameter every 12 hours.
Due to this motion, on average it takes 24 hours—a solar day—for Earth to complete a full rotation about its axis so that the Sun returns to the meridian, slightly longer than the sidereal day.
The orbital speed of Earth averages at 29.
Viewed from a vantage point above the Sun and Earth's north poles, Earth orbits in a counterclockwise direction about the Sun.
Earth, along with all of the other planets in the Solar System, orbits roughly in the same flat plane, known as the invariable plane.
Earth's inclination to this plane is about 1.
Earth, along with rest of the Solar System, is situated in the Milky Way and orbits about 28,000 light-years from its center.
It is about 20 light-years above the galactic plane in the Orion Arm.
The axial tilt of Earth is approximately 23.
Due to Earth's axial tilt, the amount of sunlight reaching any given point on the surface varies over the course of the year.
This causes the seasonal change in climate, with summer in the Northern Hemisphere occurring when the Tropic of Cancer is facing the Sun, and in the Southern Hemisphere when the Tropic of Capricorn faces the Sun.
In each instance, winter occurs simultaneously in the opposite hemisphere.
During the summer, the day lasts longer, and the Sun climbs higher in the sky.
In winter, the climate becomes cooler and the days shorter.
Above the Arctic Circle and below the Antarctic Circle there is no daylight at all for part of the year, causing a polar night, and this night extends for several months at the poles themselves.
These same latitudes also experience a midnight sun, where the sun remains visible all day.
By astronomical convention, the four seasons can be determined by the solstices—the points in the orbit of maximum axial tilt toward or away from the Sun—and the equinoxes, when Earth's rotational axis is aligned with its orbital axis.
In the Northern Hemisphere, winter solstice currently occurs around 21 December; summer solstice is near 21 June, spring equinox is around 20 March and autumnal equinox is about 22 or 23 September.
In the Southern Hemisphere, the situation is reversed, with the summer and winter solstices exchanged and the spring and autumnal equinox dates swapped.
The angle of Earth's axial tilt is relatively stable over long periods of time.
Its axial tilt does undergo nutation; a slight, irregular motion with a main period of 18.
The orientation (rather than the angle) of Earth's axis also changes over time, precessing around in a complete circle over each 25,800-year cycle; this precession is the reason for the difference between a sidereal year and a tropical year.
Both of these motions are caused by the varying attraction of the Sun and the Moon on Earth's equatorial bulge.
The poles also migrate a few meters across Earth's surface.
This polar motion has multiple, cyclical components, which collectively are termed quasiperiodic motion.
In addition to an annual component to this motion, there is a 14-month cycle called the Chandler wobble.
Earth's rotational velocity also varies in a phenomenon known as length-of-day variation.
Earth's orbit is slightly elliptical rather than perfectly circular, and its closest approach to the Sun is called perihelion.
In modern times, Earth's perihelion occurs around 3 January, and its aphelion around 4 July.
These dates shift over time due to precession and changes to the orbit, the latter of which follows cyclical patterns known as Milankovitch cycles.
The annual change in the Earth–Sun distance causes an increase of about 6.
Because the Southern Hemisphere is tilted toward the Sun at about the same time that Earth reaches the closest approach to the Sun, the Southern Hemisphere receives slightly more energy from the Sun than does the northern over the course of a year.
This effect is much less significant than the total energy change due to the axial tilt, and most of the excess energy is absorbed by the higher proportion of water in the Southern Hemisphere.
The gravity of Earth is the acceleration that is imparted to objects due to the distribution of mass within Earth.
Near Earth's surface, gravitational acceleration is approximately 9.
Local differences in topography, geology, and deeper tectonic structure cause local and broad regional differences in Earth's gravitational field, known as gravity anomalies.
The Hill sphere, or the sphere of gravitational influence, of Earth is about 1.
This is the maximum distance at which Earth's gravitational influence is stronger than that of the more distant Sun and planets.
Objects must orbit Earth within this radius, or they can become unbound by the gravitational perturbation of the Sun.
The Moon is a relatively large, terrestrial, planet-like natural satellite, with a diameter about one-quarter of Earth's.
It is the largest moon in the Solar System relative to the size of its planet, although Charon is larger relative to the dwarf planet Pluto.
The natural satellites of other planets are also referred to as "moons", after Earth's.
The Moon and Earth orbit a common barycenter every 27.
When combined with the Earth–Moon system's common orbit around the Sun, the period of the synodic month, from new moon to new moon, is 29.
Viewed from the celestial north pole, the motion of Earth, the Moon, and their axial rotations are all counterclockwise.
Viewed from Earth, the Moon is just far enough away to have almost the same apparent-sized disk as the Sun.
The angular size (or solid angle) of these two bodies match because, although the Sun's diameter is about 400 times as large as the Moon's, it is also 400 times more distant.
This allows total and annular solar eclipses to occur on Earth.
The orbital planes are not precisely aligned: the Earth-Moon plane is tilted up to ±5.
Without this tilt, there would be an eclipse every two weeks, alternating between lunar eclipses and solar eclipses.
The gravitational attraction between Earth and the Moon causes lunar tides on Earth.
The same effect on the Moon has led to its tidal locking: its rotation period is the same as the time it takes to orbit Earth.
As a result, it always presents the same face to the planet.
As the Moon orbits Earth, different parts of its face are illuminated by the Sun, leading to the lunar phases.
Due to their tidal interaction, the Moon recedes from Earth at the rate of approximately 38 mm/a (1+1⁄2 in/year).
Over millions of years, these tiny modifications—and the lengthening of Earth's day by about 23 μs/yr—add up to significant changes.
During the Ediacaran period, for example, (approximately 620 Ma) there were 400±7 days in a year, with each day lasting 21.
The Moon may have dramatically affected the development of life by moderating the planet's climate.
Paleontological evidence and computer simulations show that Earth's axial tilt is stabilized by tidal interactions with the Moon.
Some theorists think that without this stabilization against the torques applied by the Sun and planets to Earth's equatorial bulge, the rotational axis might be chaotically unstable, exhibiting large changes over millions of years, as is the case for Mars, though this is disputed.
The most widely accepted theory of the Moon's origin, the giant-impact hypothesis, states that it formed from the collision of a Mars-size protoplanet called Theia with the early Earth.
This hypothesis explains the Moon's relative lack of iron and volatile elements and the fact that its composition is nearly identical to that of Earth's crust.
Computer simulations suggest that two blob-like remnants of this protoplanet could be inside the Earth.
Earth's co-orbital asteroids population consists of quasi-satellites, objects with a horseshoe orbit and trojans.
There are at least seven quasi-satellites, including 469219 Kamoʻoalewa, ranging in diameter from 10 m to 5000 m.
A trojan asteroid companion, 2010 TK7, is librating around the leading Lagrange triangular point, L4, in Earth's orbit around the Sun.
The tiny near-Earth asteroid 2006 RH120 makes close approaches to the Earth–Moon system roughly every twenty years.
During these approaches, it can orbit Earth for brief periods of time.
As of September 2021, there are 4,550 operational, human-made satellites orbiting Earth.
There are also inoperative satellites, including Vanguard 1, the oldest satellite currently in orbit, and over 16,000 pieces of tracked space debris.
Earth's largest artificial satellite is the International Space Station (ISS).
Earth is the only known place that has ever been habitable for life.
Earth's life developed in Earth's early bodies of water some hundred million years after Earth formed, roughly 4 billion years ago.
Earth provides liquid water—an environment where complex organic molecules can assemble and interact, and sufficient energy to sustain a metabolism.
Plants and other organisms take up nutrients from water, soils and the atmosphere.
These nutrients are constantly recycled between different species.
Earth's life has been shaping and inhabiting many particular ecosystems on Earth and has eventually expanded globally forming an overarching biosphere.
Earth's life has also over time greatly diversified, allowing the biosphere to have different biomes, which are inhabited by comparatively similar plants and animals.
The different biomes developed at distinct elevations or water depths, planetary temperature latitudes and on land also with different humidity.
Earth's species diversity and biomass reaches a peak in shallow waters and with forests, particularly in equatorial, warm and humid conditions.
While freezing polar regions and high altitudes, or extremely arid areas are relatively barren of plant and animal life.
Therefore, life has impacted Earth, significantly altering Earth's atmosphere and surface over long periods of time, causing changes like the Great Oxidation Event.
Humans furthermore have impacted Earth, its life and development.
Extreme weather, such as tropical cyclones, occurs over most of Earth's surface and has a large impact on life in those areas.
From 1980 to 2000, these events caused an average of 11,800 human deaths per year.
Many places are subject to earthquakes, landslides, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions, tornadoes, blizzards, floods, droughts, wildfires, and other calamities and disasters.
Human impact is felt in many areas due to pollution of the air and water, acid rain, loss of vegetation (overgrazing, deforestation, desertification), loss of wildlife, species extinction, soil degradation, soil depletion and erosion.
Human activities release greenhouse gases into the atmosphere which cause global warming.
This is driving changes such as the melting of glaciers and ice sheets, a global rise in average sea levels, increased risk of drought and wildfires, and migration of species to colder areas.
Humans, who originated from earlier primates in Eastern Africa 300,000 years ago, have since been migrating around Earth, and with the advent of agriculture in the 10th millennium BCE, have been increasingly settling Earth's land.
In the 20th century, Antarctica became the last continent to be explored and settled by humans, although human presence there remains limited.
Since the 19th century, the human population has grown exponentially to eight billion in the 2020s, and is projected to peak at around ten billion in the second half of the 21st century.
Most of the growth is expected to take place in sub-Saharan Africa.
Distribution and density of human population varies greatly around the world with the majority living in south to eastern Asia and 90% inhabiting the Northern Hemisphere of Earth, partly due to the hemispherical predominance of the world's land mass, with 68% of the world's land mass being in the Northern Hemisphere.
Furthermore, since the 19th century humans have increasingly converged into urban areas, with the majority living in urban areas by the 21st century.
Beyond Earth's surface, humans have lived only in a few special-purpose deep underground and underwater presences and a few space stations.
The human population virtually completely remains on Earth's surface, fully depending on Earth and the environment it sustains.
Since the second half of the 20th century, some hundreds of humans have temporarily stayed beyond Earth, a tiny fraction of whom have reached another celestial body, the Moon.
Earth has been subject to extensive human settlement, and humans have developed diverse societies and cultures.
Most of Earth's land has been territorially claimed since the 19th century by sovereign states (countries) separated by political borders, and 205 such states exist today, with only parts of Antarctica and a few small regions remaining unclaimed.
Together, most of these states form the United Nations, the leading worldwide intergovernmental organization, which extends human governance over the ocean and Antarctica, and therefore all of Earth.
Earth has resources that have been exploited by humans.
Those termed non-renewable resources, such as fossil fuels, are only replenished over geological timescales.
Large deposits of fossil fuels are obtained from Earth's crust, consisting of coal, petroleum, and natural gas.
These deposits are used by humans both for energy production and as feedstock for chemical production.
Mineral ore bodies have also been formed within the crust through a process of ore genesis, resulting from actions of magmatism, erosion, and plate tectonics.
These metals and other elements are extracted by mining, a process which often causes environmental and health damage.
Earth's biosphere produces many useful biological products for humans, including food, wood, pharmaceuticals, oxygen, and the recycling of organic waste.
The land-based ecosystem depends upon topsoil and fresh water, and the oceanic ecosystem depends on dissolved nutrients washed down from the land.
In 2019, 39 million km2 (15 million sq mi) of Earth's land surface consisted of forest and woodlands, 12 million km2 (4.
Of the 12–14% of ice-free land that is used for croplands, 2 percentage points were irrigated in 2015.
Humans use natural and manufactured building materials to construct shelters and infrastructure.
Human activities have impacted Earth's environments.
Through activities such as the burning of fossil fuels, humans have been increasing the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, altering Earth's energy budget and climate.
It is estimated that global temperatures in the year 2020 were 1.
This increase in temperature, known as global warming, has contributed to the melting of glaciers, rising sea levels, increased risk of drought and wildfires, and migration of species to colder areas.
The concept of planetary boundaries was introduced to quantify humanity's impact on Earth.
Of the nine identified boundaries, five have been crossed: Biosphere integrity, climate change, chemical pollution, destruction of wild habitats and the nitrogen cycle are thought to have passed the safe threshold.
As of 2018, no country meets the basic needs of its population without transgressing planetary boundaries.
It is thought possible to provide all basic physical needs globally within sustainable levels of resource use.
Human cultures have developed many views of the planet.
Earth is sometimes personified as a deity.
In many cultures, it is a mother goddess that is also the primary fertility deity.
Creation myths in many religions involve the creation of Earth by a supernatural deity or deities.
The Gaia hypothesis, developed in the mid-20th century, compared Earth's environments and life as a single self-regulating organism leading to broad stabilization of the conditions of habitability.
Scientific investigation has resulted in several culturally transformative shifts in people's view of the planet.
Initial belief in a flat Earth was gradually displaced in Ancient Greece by the idea of a spherical Earth, which was attributed to both the philosophers Pythagoras and Parmenides.
Earth was generally believed to be the center of the universe until the 16th century, when scientists first concluded that it was a moving object, one of the planets of the Solar System.
It was only during the 19th century that geologists realized Earth's age was at least many millions of years.
Lord Kelvin used thermodynamics to estimate the age of Earth to be between 20 million and 400 million years in 1864, sparking a vigorous debate on the subject; it was only when radioactivity and radioactive dating were discovered in the late 19th and early 20th centuries that a reliable mechanism for determining Earth's age was established, proving the planet to be billions of years old.
Images of Earth taken from space, particularly Earthrise and The Blue Marble, have been credited with altering the way that people viewed the planet that they lived on, called the overview effect, emphasizing its beauty, uniqueness, community and apparent fragility.
In particular, this caused a realization of the scope of effects from human activity on Earth's environment.
Enabled by science, particularly Earth observation, humans have started to take action on environmental issues globally, acknowledging the impact of humans and the interconnectedness of Earth's environments.
A continent is any of several large terrestrial geographical regions.
Continents are generally identified by convention rather than any strict criteria.
A continent could be a single large landmass, a landmass and nearby islands either on or beyond its continental shelf, or a part of a larger landmass, as in the case of Asia and Europe within Eurasia.
Due to these varying definitions, the number of continents varies, up to seven or as few as four.
Most English-speaking countries recognize seven continents.
In order from largest to smallest in area, these seven are Asia, Africa, North America, South America, Antarctica, Europe, and Australia (or sometimes Oceania or Australasia).
Different variations with fewer continents merge some of these regions; examples of this are merging Asia and Europe into Eurasia, North America and South America into the Americas (or simply America), and Africa, Asia, and Europe into Afro-Eurasia.
Oceanic islands are occasionally grouped with a nearby continent to divide all the world's land into geographical regions.
Under this scheme, most of the island countries and territories in the Pacific Ocean are grouped together with the continent of Australia to form the geographical region of Oceania.
In geology, a continent is defined as "one of Earth's major landmasses, including both dry land and continental shelves".
The geological continents correspond to seven large areas of continental crust that are found on the tectonic plates, but exclude small continental fragments such as Madagascar that are generally referred to as microcontinents.
Continental crust is only known to exist on Earth.
The idea of continental drift gained recognition in the 20th century.
It postulates that the current continents formed from the breaking up of a supercontinent (Pangaea) that formed hundreds of millions of years ago.
From the 16th century the English noun continent was derived from the term continent land, meaning continuous or connected land and translated from the Latin terra continens.
The noun was used to mean "a connected or continuous tract of land" or mainland.
It was not applied only to very large areas of land—in the 17th century, references were made to the continents (or mainlands) of the Isle of Man, Ireland and Wales and in 1745 to Sumatra.
The word continent was used in translating Greek and Latin writings about the three "parts" of the world, although in the original languages no word of exactly the same meaning as continent was used.
While continent was used on the one hand for relatively small areas of continuous land, on the other hand geographers again raised Herodotus's query about why a single large landmass should be divided into separate continents.
In the mid-17th century, Peter Heylin wrote in his Cosmographie that "A Continent is a great quantity of Land, not separated by any Sea from the rest of the World, as the whole Continent of Europe, Asia, Africa.
Thus Europe, Asia, and Africa is one great continent, as America is another.
By convention, continents "are understood to be large, continuous, discrete masses of land, ideally separated by expanses of water".
By this definition, all continents have to be an island of some metric.
In modern schemes with five or more recognized continents, at least one pair of continents is joined by land in some fashion.
The criterion "large" leads to arbitrary classification: Greenland, with a surface area of 2,166,086 square kilometres (836,330 sq mi), is only considered the world's largest island, while Australia, at 7,617,930 square kilometres (2,941,300 sq mi), is deemed the smallest continent.
Earth's major landmasses all have coasts on a single, continuous World Ocean, which is divided into several principal oceanic components by the continents and various geographic criteria.
The geological definition of a continent has four criteria: high elevation relative to the ocean floor; a wide range of igneous, metamorphic and sedimentary rocks rich in silica; a crust thicker than the surrounding oceanic crust; and well-defined limits around a large enough area.
The most restricted meaning of continent is that of a continuous area of land or mainland, with the coastline and any land boundaries forming the edge of the continent.
In this sense, the term continental Europe (sometimes referred to in Britain as "the Continent") is used to refer to mainland Europe, excluding islands such as Great Britain, Iceland, Ireland, and Malta, while the term continent of Australia may refer to the mainland of Australia, excluding New Guinea, Tasmania, and other nearby islands.
Similarly, the continental United States refers to "the 49 States (including Alaska but excluding Hawaii) located on the continent of North America, and the District of Columbia.
From the perspective of geology or physical geography, continent may be extended beyond the confines of continuous dry land to include the shallow, submerged adjacent area (the continental shelf) and the islands on the shelf (continental islands), as they are structurally part of the continent.
From this perspective, the edge of the continental shelf is the true edge of the continent, as shorelines vary with changes in sea level.
In this sense the islands of Great Britain and Ireland are part of Europe, while Australia and the island of New Guinea together form a continent.
Taken to its limit, this view could support the view that there are only three continents: Antarctica, Australia-New Guinea, and a single mega-continent which joins Afro-Eurasia and America via the contiguous continental shelf in and around the Bering Sea.
The vast size of the latter compared to the first two might even lead some to say it is the only continent, the others being more comparable to Greenland or New Zealand.
As a cultural construct, the concept of a continent may go beyond the continental shelf to include oceanic islands and continental fragments.
In this way, Iceland is considered a part of Europe, and Madagascar a part of Africa.
Extrapolating the concept to its extreme, some geographers group the Australian continental landmass with other islands in the Pacific Ocean into Oceania, which is usually considered a region rather than a continent.
This divides the entire land surface of Earth into continents, regions, or quasi-continents.
The criterion that each continent is a discrete landmass is commonly relaxed due to historical conventions and practical use.
Of the seven most globally recognized continents, only Antarctica and Australia are completely separated from other continents by the ocean.
Several continents are defined not as absolutely distinct bodies but as "more or less discrete masses of land".
Africa and Asia are joined by the Isthmus of Suez, and North America and South America by the Isthmus of Panama.
In both cases, there is no complete separation of these landmasses by water (disregarding the Suez Canal and the Panama Canal, which are both narrow and shallow, as well as human-made).
Both of these isthmuses are very narrow compared to the bulk of the landmasses they unite.
North America and South America are treated as separate continents in the seven-continent model.
However, they may also be viewed as a single continent known as America.
This viewpoint was common in the United States until World War II, and remains prevalent in some Asian and most Latin American six-continent models.
The criterion of a discrete landmass is completely disregarded if the continuous landmass of Eurasia is classified as two separate continents (Asia and Europe).
Physiographically, Europe and the Indian subcontinent are large peninsulas of the Eurasian landmass.
However, Europe is considered a continent with its comparatively large land area of 10,180,000 square kilometres (3,930,000 sq mi), while the Indian subcontinent, with less than half that area, is considered a subcontinent.
The alternative view—in geology and geography—that Eurasia is a single continent results in a six-continent view of the world.
Some view the separation of Eurasia into Asia and Europe as a residue of Eurocentrism: "In physical, cultural and historical diversity, China and India are comparable to the entire European landmass, not to a single European country.
If continents are defined strictly as discrete landmasses, embracing all the contiguous land of a body, then Africa, Asia, and Europe form a single continent which may be referred to as Afro-Eurasia.
Combined with the consolidation of the Americas, this would produce a four-continent model consisting of Afro-Eurasia, America, Antarctica, and Australia.
When sea levels were lower during the Pleistocene ice ages, greater areas of the continental shelf were exposed as dry land, forming land bridges between Tasmania and the Australian mainland.
At those times, Australia and New Guinea were a single, continuous continent known as Sahul.
Likewise, Afro-Eurasia and the Americas were joined by the Bering Land Bridge.
Other islands, such as Great Britain, were joined to the mainlands of their continents.
At that time, there were just three discrete landmasses in the world: Africa-Eurasia-America, Antarctica, and Australia-New Guinea (Sahul).
The seven-continent model is taught in most English-speaking countries, including Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States, and also in Bangladesh, China, India, Indonesia, Pakistan, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Suriname, parts of Europe and Africa.
The six-continent combined-America model is taught in Greece and many Romance-speaking countries—including Latin America.
The Olympic flag's five rings represent the five inhabited continents of the combined-America model but exclude the uninhabited Antarctica.
The six-continent combined-Eurasia model is mostly used in Russia and some parts of Eastern Europe.
In the English-speaking countries, geographers often use the term Oceania to denote a geographical region which includes most of the island countries and territories in the Pacific Ocean, as well as the continent of Australia.
Outside of the English-speaking world, Oceania is generally considered a continent, while Mainland Australia is regarded as its continental landmass.
Zealandia (a submerged continent) has been called the eighth continent.
The following table provides areas given by the Encyclopædia Britannica for each continent in accordance with the seven-continent model, including Australasia along with Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia as parts of Oceania.
It also provides populations of continents according to 2021 estimates by the United Nations Statistics Division based on the United Nations geoscheme, which includes all of Egypt (including the Isthmus of Suez and the Sinai Peninsula) as a part of Africa, all of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Cyprus, Georgia, Indonesia (including Western New Guinea,) Kazakhstan, and Turkey (including East Thrace) as parts of Asia, all of Russia (including Siberia) as a part of Europe, all of Panama and the United States (including Hawaii) as parts of North America, and all of Chile (including Easter Island) as a part of South America.
Apart from the current continents, the scope and meaning of the term continent includes past geological ones.
Supercontinents, largely in evidence earlier in the geological record, are landmasses that comprise most of the world's cratons or continental cores.
These have included Vaalbara, Kenorland, Columbia, Rodinia, Pannotia, and Pangaea.
Over time, these supercontinents broke apart into large landmasses which formed the present continents.
Certain parts of continents are recognized as subcontinents, especially the large peninsulas separated from the main continental landmass by geographical features.
The most widely recognized example is the Indian subcontinent.
The Arabian Peninsula, Southern Africa, the Southern Cone of South America, and Alaska in North America might be considered further examples.
In many of these cases, the "subcontinents" concerned are on different tectonic plates from the rest of the continent, providing a geological justification for the terminology.
Greenland, generally considered the world's largest island on the northeastern periphery of the North American Plate, is sometimes referred to as a subcontinent.
This is a significant departure from the more conventional view of a subcontinent as comprising a very large peninsula on the fringe of a continent.
Where the Americas are viewed as a single continent (America), it is divided into two subcontinents (North America and South America) or three (Central America being the third).
When Eurasia is regarded as a single continent, Asia and Europe are treated as subcontinents.
Some areas of continental crust are largely covered by the ocean and may be considered submerged continents.
Notable examples are Zealandia, emerging from the ocean primarily in New Zealand and New Caledonia, and the almost completely submerged Kerguelen Plateau in the southern Indian Ocean.
Some islands lie on sections of continental crust that have rifted and drifted apart from a main continental landmass.
While not considered continents because of their relatively small size, they may be considered microcontinents.
Madagascar, the largest example, is usually considered an island of Africa, but its divergent evolution has caused it to be referred to as "the eighth continent" from a biological perspective.
Elevation – The landmass, whether dry or submerged beneath the ocean, should be elevated above the surrounding ocean crust.
Geology – The landmass should contain different types of rock: igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary.
Crustal structure – The landmass should consist of the continental crust, which is thicker and has a lower seismic velocity than the oceanic crust.
Limits and area – The landmass should have clearly defined boundaries and an area of more than one million square kilometres.
Due to a seeming lack of Precambrian cratonic rocks, Zealandia's status as a geological continent has been disputed by some geologists.
However, a study conducted in 2021 found that part of the submerged continent is indeed Precambrian, twice as old as geologists had previously thought, which is further evidence that supports the idea of Zealandia being a geological continent.
All seven geological continents are spatially isolated by geologic features.
The term "continent" translates the Greek word ἤπειρος, meaning "landmass, terra firma", the proper name of Epirus and later especially used for Asia (i.
The first distinction between continents was made by ancient Greek mariners who gave the names Europe and Asia to the lands on either side of the waterways of the Aegean Sea, the Dardanelles strait, the Sea of Marmara, the Bosporus strait and the Black Sea.
The names were first applied just to lands near the coast and only later extended to include the hinterlands.
But the division was only carried through to the end of navigable waterways and ".
Ancient Greek thinkers subsequently debated whether Africa (then called Libya) should be considered part of Asia or a third part of the world.
Division into three parts eventually came to predominate.
From the Greek viewpoint, the Aegean Sea was the center of the world; Asia lay to the east, Europe to the north and west, and Africa to the south.
The boundaries between the continents were not fixed.
Early on, the Europe–Asia boundary was taken to run from the Black Sea along the Rioni River (known then as the Phasis) in Georgia.
Later it was viewed as running from the Black Sea through Kerch Strait, the Sea of Azov and along the Don River (known then as the Tanais) in Russia.
The boundary between Asia and Africa was generally taken to be the Nile River.
Herodotus in the 5th century BCE objected to the whole of Egypt being split between Asia and Africa ("Libya") and took the boundary to lie along the western border of Egypt, regarding Egypt as part of Asia.
He also questioned the division into three of what is really a single landmass, a debate that continues nearly two and a half millennia later.
I wonder, then, at those who have mapped out and divided the world into Libya, Asia, and Europe; for the difference between them is great, seeing that in length Europe stretches along both the others together, and it appears to me to be wider beyond all comparison.
Eratosthenes, in the 3rd century BCE, noted that some geographers divided the continents by rivers (the Nile and the Don), thus considering them "islands".
Others divided the continents by isthmuses, calling the continents "peninsulas".
These latter geographers set the border between Europe and Asia at the isthmus between the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea, and the border between Asia and Africa at the isthmus between the Red Sea and the mouth of Lake Bardawil on the Mediterranean Sea.
I shall first then speak of Europe, the foster-mother of that people which has conquered all other nations, and itself by far the most beauteous portion of the earth.
Indeed, many persons have, not without reason, considered it, not as a third part only of the earth, but as equal to all the rest, looking upon the whole of our globe as divided into two parts only, by a line drawn from the river Tanais to the Straits of Gades.
Following the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the culture that developed in its place, linked to Latin and the Catholic church, began to associate itself with the concept of Europe.
Through the Roman period and the Middle Ages, a few writers took the Isthmus of Suez as the boundary between Asia and Africa, but most writers continued to consider it the Nile or the western border of Egypt (Gibbon).
In the Middle Ages, the world was usually portrayed on T and O maps, with the T representing the waters dividing the three continents.
By the middle of the 18th century, "the fashion of dividing Asia and Africa at the Nile, or at the Great Catabathmus [the boundary between Egypt and Libya] farther west, had even then scarcely passed away".
Christopher Columbus sailed across the Atlantic Ocean to the Caribbean in 1492, sparking a period of European exploration of the Americas.
But despite four voyages to the Americas, Columbus never believed he had reached a new continent—he always thought it was part of Asia.
In 1501, Amerigo Vespucci and Gonçalo Coelho attempted to sail around what they considered the southern end of the Asian mainland into the Indian Ocean, passing through Fernando de Noronha.
After reaching the coast of Brazil, they sailed along the coast of South America much farther south than Asia was known to extend, confirming that this was a land of continental proportions.
On return to Europe, an account of the voyage, called Mundus Novus ("New World"), was published under Vespucci's name in 1502 or 1503, although it seems that it had additions or alterations by another writer.
Regardless of who penned the words, Mundus Novus credited Vespucci with saying, "I have discovered a continent in those southern regions that is inhabited by more numerous people and animals than our Europe, or Asia or Africa", the first known explicit identification of part of the Americas as a continent like the other three.
Within a few years, the name "New World" began appearing as a name for South America on world maps, such as the Oliveriana (Pesaro) map of around 1504–1505.
Maps of this time, though, still showed North America connected to Asia and showed South America as a separate land.
In 1507 Martin Waldseemüller published a world map, Universalis Cosmographia, which was the first to show North and South America as separate from Asia and surrounded by water.
A small inset map above the main map explicitly showed for the first time the Americas being east of Asia and separated from Asia by an ocean, as opposed to just placing the Americas on the left end of the map and Asia on the right end.
In the accompanying book Cosmographiae Introductio, Waldseemüller noted that the earth is divided into four parts, Europe, Asia, Africa, and the fourth part, which he named "America" after Amerigo Vespucci's first name.
On the map, the word "America" was placed on part of South America.
The Sanskrit text Rig Veda often dated 1500 BCE has the earliest mention of seven continents in the Earth, the text claims that the Earth has seven continents and Lord Vishnu Measured the entire universe from his first foot from the land of Earth which has 7 continents.
In regard to the above-quoted verses, it is commonly accepted that there are Seven Continents or 'regions of the earth'.
Glucklich adds that 'In the Matsya Purana, for instance, there is a seven-part map of the world .
The continents encircle the mountain in seven concentric circles .
It seems clear that the Himalayas were the approximate location of Mt.
Meru and the text is clear that the earth has seven continents.
From the late 18th century, some geographers started to regard North America and South America as two parts of the world, making five parts in total.
Overall though, the fourfold division prevailed well into the 19th century.
Europeans discovered Australia in 1606, but for some time it was taken as part of Asia.
By the late 18th century, some geographers considered it a continent in its own right, making it the sixth (or fifth for those still taking America as a single continent).
In 1813, Samuel Butler wrote of Australia as "New Holland, an immense island, which some geographers dignify with the appellation of another continent" and the Oxford English Dictionary was just as equivocal some decades later.
It was in the 1950s that the concept of Oceania as a "great division" of the world was replaced by the concept of Australia as a continent.
Antarctica was sighted in 1820 during the First Russian Antarctic Expedition and described as a continent by Charles Wilkes on the United States Exploring Expedition in 1838, the last continent identified, although a great "Antarctic" (antipodean) landmass had been anticipated for millennia.
An 1849 atlas labelled Antarctica as a continent but few atlases did so until after World War II.
Over time, the western concept of dividing the world into continents spread globally, replacing conceptions in other areas of the world.
The idea of continents continued to become imbued with cultural and political meaning.
In the 19th century during the Meiji period, Japanese leaders began to self-identify with the concept of being Asian, and renew relations with other "Asian" countries while conceiving of the idea of Asian solidarity against western countries.
This conception of an Asian identity, as well as the idea of Asian solidarity, was later taken up by others in the region, such as Republican China and Vietnam.
From the mid-19th century, atlases published in the United States more commonly treated North and South America as separate continents, while atlases published in Europe usually considered them one continent.
However, it was still not uncommon for American atlases to treat them as one continent up until World War II.
From the 1950s, most U.
With the addition of Antarctica, this made the seven-continent model.
However, this division of the Americas did not appeal to Latin Americans, who saw their region spanning an América as a single landmass, and there the conception of six continents remains popular.
Some geographers regard Europe and Asia together as a single continent, dubbed Eurasia.
In this model, the world is divided into six continents, with North America and South America considered separate continents.
Geologists use the term continent in a different manner from geographers.
In geology, a continent is defined by continental crust, which is a platform of metamorphic and igneous rocks, largely of granitic composition.
Continental crust is less dense and much thicker than oceanic crust, which causes it to "float" higher than oceanic crust on the dense underlying mantle.
This explains why the continents form high platforms surrounded by deep ocean basins.
Some geologists restrict the term continent to portions of the crust built around stable regions called cratons.
Cratons have largely been unaffected by mountain-building events (orogenies) since the Precambrian.
A craton typically consists of a continental shield surrounded by a continental platform.
The shield is a region where ancient crystalline basement rock (typically 1.
The platform surrounding the shield is also composed of ancient basement rock, but with a cover of younger sedimentary rock.
The continents are accretionary crustal "rafts" that, unlike the denser basaltic crust of the ocean basins, are not subjected to destruction through the plate tectonic process of subduction.
This accounts for the great age of the rocks comprising the continental cratons.
The margins of geologic continents are either active or passive.
An active margin is characterised by mountain building, either through a continent-on continent collision or a subduction zone.
Continents grow by accreting lighter volcanic island chains and microcontinents along these active margins, forming orogens.
At a passive margin, the continental crust is stretched thin by extension to form a continental shelf, which tapers off with a gradual slope covered in sediment, connecting it directly to the oceanic crust beyond.
Most passive margins eventually transition into active margins: where the oceanic plate becomes too heavy due to cooling, it disconnects from the continental crust, and starts subducting below it, forming a new subduction zone.
There are many microcontinents, or continental fragments, that are built of continental crust but do not contain a craton.
Some of these are fragments of Gondwana or other ancient cratonic continents: Zealandia, which includes New Zealand and New Caledonia; Madagascar; the northern Mascarene Plateau, which includes the Seychelles.
Other islands, such as several in the Caribbean Sea, are composed largely of granitic rock as well, but all continents contain both granitic and basaltic crust, and there is no clear boundary as to which islands would be considered microcontinents under such a definition.
The Kerguelen Plateau, for example, is largely volcanic, but is associated with the breakup of Gondwanaland and is considered a microcontinent, whereas volcanic Iceland and Hawaii are not.
The British Isles, Sri Lanka, Borneo, and Newfoundland were on the margins of the Laurasian continent—only separated from the main continental landmass by inland seas flooding its margins.
The movement of plates has caused the continual formation and breakup of continents, and occasionally supercontinents, in a process called the Wilson Cycle.
The supercontinent Columbia or Nuna formed during a period of 2.
The supercontinent Rodinia is thought to have formed about 1 billion years ago and to have embodied most or all of Earth's continents, and broken up into eight continents around 600 million years ago.
The eight continents later reassembled into another supercontinent called Pangaea; Pangaea broke up into Laurasia (which became North America and Eurasia) and Gondwana (which became the remaining continents).
Some academics, such as the historical geographer Martin W.
Lewis, argue that the systems we understand today are more rooted in social, political, and cultural history than in geological fact, a view particularly outlined in his book The Myth of Continents: A Critique of Metageography.
Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.
A mountain is an elevated portion of the surface of a planet, generally with steep sides that show significant exposed bedrock.
Although there are no universally accepted definitions, a mountain is usually considered higher than a hill.
By definition, mountains are often thought of as being a hill which is higher than 2,000 feet (610 m).
It may either have a limited summit area or be a smaller plateau with high elevation and steep sides.
A few mountains are isolated summits, but most occur in mountain ranges.
Mountains are formed through tectonic forces, erosion, or volcanism, which act on time scales of up to tens of millions of years.
Once mountain building ceases, mountains are slowly leveled through the action of weathering, through slumping and other forms of mass wasting, as well as through erosion by rivers and glaciers.
High elevations on mountains produce colder climates than at sea level at similar latitude.
These colder climates strongly affect the ecosystems of mountains: different elevations have different plants and animals.
Because of the less hospitable terrain and climate, mountains tend to be used less for agriculture and more for resource extraction, such as mining and logging, along with recreation, such as mountain climbing and skiing.
The highest mountain on Earth is Mount Everest in the Himalayas of Asia, whose summit is 8,850 m (29,035 ft) above mean sea level.
The highest known mountain on any planet in the Solar System is Olympus Mons on Mars at 21,171 m (69,459 ft).
The highest mountain on Earth from base to peak is Mauna Kea in Hawaii, which rises 9,330 m (30,610 ft) from its base at the bottom of the ocean; some scientists consider it to be the tallest on Earth.
There is no universally accepted definition of a mountain.
Elevation, volume, relief, steepness, spacing and continuity have been used as criteria for defining a mountain.
In the Oxford English Dictionary a mountain is defined as "a natural elevation of the earth surface rising more or less abruptly from the surrounding level and attaining an altitude which, relatively to the adjacent elevation, is impressive or notable.
Whether a landform is called a mountain may depend on local usage.
John Whittow's Dictionary of Physical Geography states "Some authorities regard eminences above 600 metres (1,969 ft) as mountains, those below being referred to as hills.
In the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland, a mountain is usually defined as any summit at least 2,000 feet (610 m) high, which accords with the official UK government's definition that a mountain, for the purposes of access, is a summit of 2,000 feet (610 m) or higher.
In addition, some definitions also include a topographical prominence requirement, such as that the mountain rises 300 metres (984 ft) above the surrounding terrain.
At one time, the United States Board on Geographic Names defined a mountain as being 1,000 feet (305 m) or taller, but has abandoned the definition since the 1970s.
Any similar landform lower than this height was considered a hill.
However, today, the United States Geological Survey concludes that these terms do not have technical definitions in the US.
Class 1: Elevation greater than 4,500 m (14,764 ft).
Class 2: Elevation between 3,500 and 4,500 m (11,483 and 14,764 ft).
Class 3: Elevation between 2,500 and 3,500 m (8,202 and 11,483 ft).
Class 4: Elevation between 1,500 and 2,500 m (4,921 and 8,202 ft), with a slope greater than 2 degrees.
Class 5: Elevation between 1,000 and 1,500 m (3,281 and 4,921 ft), with a slope greater than 5 degrees or 300 m (984 ft) elevation range within 7 km (4.
Class 6: Elevation between 300 and 1,000 m (984 and 3,281 ft), with a 300 m (984 ft) elevation range within 7 km (4.
Class 7: Isolated inner basins and plateaus less than 25 km2 (9.
Using these definitions, mountains cover 33% of Eurasia, 19% of South America, 24% of North America, and 14% of Africa.
As a whole, 24% of the Earth's land mass is mountainous.
There are three main types of mountains: volcanic, fold, and block.
All three types are formed from plate tectonics: when portions of the Earth's crust move, crumple, and dive.
Compressional forces, isostatic uplift and intrusion of igneous matter forces surface rock upward, creating a landform higher than the surrounding features.
The height of the feature makes it either a hill or, if higher and steeper, a mountain.
Major mountains tend to occur in long linear arcs, indicating tectonic plate boundaries and activity.
Volcanoes are formed when a plate is pushed below another plate, or at a mid-ocean ridge or hotspot.
At a depth of around 100 km (60 mi), melting occurs in rock above the slab (due to the addition of water), and forms magma that reaches the surface.
When the magma reaches the surface, it often builds a volcanic mountain, such as a shield volcano or a stratovolcano.
Examples of volcanoes include Mount Fuji in Japan and Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines.
The magma does not have to reach the surface in order to create a mountain: magma that solidifies below ground can still form dome mountains, such as Navajo Mountain in the United States.
Fold mountains occur when two plates collide: shortening occurs along thrust faults and the crust is overthickened.
Since the less dense continental crust "floats" on the denser mantle rocks beneath, the weight of any crustal material forced upward to form hills, plateaus or mountains must be balanced by the buoyancy force of a much greater volume forced downward into the mantle.
Thus the continental crust is normally much thicker under mountains, compared to lower lying areas.
Rock can fold either symmetrically or asymmetrically.
The upfolds are anticlines and the downfolds are synclines: in asymmetric folding there may also be recumbent and overturned folds.
The Balkan Mountains and the Jura Mountains are examples of fold mountains.
Block mountains are caused by faults in the crust: a plane where rocks have moved past each other.
When rocks on one side of a fault rise relative to the other, it can form a mountain.
The uplifted blocks are block mountains or horsts.
The intervening dropped blocks are termed graben: these can be small or form extensive rift valley systems.
This kind of landscape can be seen in East Africa, the Vosges and Rhine valley, and the Basin and Range Province of Western North America.
These areas often occur when the regional stress is extensional and the crust is thinned.
During and following uplift, mountains are subjected to the agents of erosion (water, wind, ice, and gravity) which gradually wear the uplifted area down.
Erosion causes the surface of mountains to be younger than the rocks that form the mountains themselves.
Glacial processes produce characteristic landforms, such as pyramidal peaks, knife-edge arêtes, and bowl-shaped cirques that can contain lakes.
Plateau mountains, such as the Catskills, are formed from the erosion of an uplifted plateau.
Climate in the mountains becomes colder at high elevations, due to an interaction between radiation and convection.
Sunlight in the visible spectrum hits the ground and heats it.
The ground then heats the air at the surface.
If radiation were the only way to transfer heat from the ground to space, the greenhouse effect of gases in the atmosphere would keep the ground at roughly 333 K (60 °C; 140 °F), and the temperature would decay exponentially with height.
However, when air is hot, it tends to expand, which lowers its density.
Thus, hot air tends to rise and transfer heat upward.
This is the process of convection.
Convection comes to equilibrium when a parcel of air at a given altitude has the same density as its surroundings.
Air is a poor conductor of heat, so a parcel of air will rise and fall without exchanging heat.
This is known as an adiabatic process, which has a characteristic pressure-temperature dependence.
As the pressure gets lower, the temperature decreases.
The rate of decrease of temperature with elevation is known as the adiabatic lapse rate, which is approximately 9.
The presence of water in the atmosphere complicates the process of convection.
Water vapor contains latent heat of vaporization.
As air rises and cools, it eventually becomes saturated and cannot hold its quantity of water vapor.
The water vapor condenses to form clouds and releases heat, which changes the lapse rate from the dry adiabatic lapse rate to the moist adiabatic lapse rate (5.
The actual lapse rate can vary by altitude and by location.
Therefore, moving up 100 m (330 ft) on a mountain is roughly equivalent to moving 80 kilometres (45 miles or 0.
This relationship is only approximate, however, since local factors such as proximity to oceans (such as the Arctic Ocean) can drastically modify the climate.
As the altitude increases, the main form of precipitation becomes snow and the winds increase.
The effect of the climate on the ecology at an elevation can be largely captured through a combination of amount of precipitation, and the biotemperature, as described by Leslie Holdridge in 1947.
Biotemperature is the mean temperature; all temperatures below 0 °C (32 °F) are considered to be 0 °C.
When the temperature is below 0 °C, plants are dormant, so the exact temperature is unimportant.
The peaks of mountains with permanent snow can have a biotemperature below 1.
Mountain environments are particularly sensitive to anthropogenic climate change and are currently undergoing alterations unprecedented in last 10,000 years.
The effect of global warming on mountain regions (relative to lowlands) is still an active area of study.
Observational studies show that highlands are warming faster than nearby lowlands, but when compared globally, the effect disappears.
Precipitation in highland areas is not increasing as quickly as in lowland areas.
Climate modeling give mixed signals about whether a particular highland area will have increased or decreased precipitation.
Climate change has started to affect the physical and ecological systems of mountains.
In recent decades mountain ice caps and glaciers have experienced accelerating ice loss.
The melting of the glaciers, permafrost and snow has caused underlying surfaces to become increasingly unstable.
Landslip hazards have increased in both number and magnitude due to climate change.
Patterns of river discharge will also be significantly affected by climate change, which in turn will have significant impacts on communities that rely on water fed from alpine sources.
Nearly half of mountain areas provide essential or supportive water resources for mainly urban populations, in particular during the dry season and in semiarid areas such as in central Asia.
Alpine ecosystems can be particularly climatically sensitive.
Many mid-latitude mountains act as cold climate refugia, with the ecosystems occupying small environmental niches.
As well as the direct influence that the change in climate can have on an ecosystem, there is also the indirect one on the soils from changes in stability and soil development.
The colder climate on mountains affects the plants and animals residing on mountains.
A particular set of plants and animals tend to be adapted to a relatively narrow range of climate.
Thus, ecosystems tend to lie along elevation bands of roughly constant climate.
This is called altitudinal zonation.
In regions with dry climates, the tendency of mountains to have higher precipitation as well as lower temperatures also provides for varying conditions, which enhances zonation.
Some plants and animals found in altitudinal zones tend to become isolated since the conditions above and below a particular zone will be inhospitable and thus constrain their movements or dispersal.
These isolated ecological systems are known as sky islands.
Altitudinal zones tend to follow a typical pattern.
At the highest elevations, trees cannot grow, and whatever life may be present will be of the alpine type, resembling tundra.
Just below the tree line, one may find subalpine forests of needleleaf trees, which can withstand cold, dry conditions.
Below that, montane forests grow.
In the temperate portions of the earth, those forests tend to be needleleaf trees, while in the tropics, they can be broadleaf trees growing in a rainforest.
The highest known permanently tolerable altitude is at 5,950 metres (19,520 ft).
At very high altitudes, the decreasing atmospheric pressure means that less oxygen is available for breathing, and there is less protection against solar radiation (UV).
Above 8,000 metres (26,000 ft) elevation, there is not enough oxygen to support human life.
This is sometimes referred to as the "death zone".
The summits of Mount Everest and K2 are in the death zone.
Mountains are generally less preferable for human habitation than lowlands, because of harsh weather and little level ground suitable for agriculture.
While 7% of the land area of Earth is above 2,500 metres (8,200 ft), only 140 million people live above that altitude and only 20–30 million people above 3,000 metres (9,800 ft) elevation.
About half of mountain dwellers live in the Andes, Central Asia, and Africa.
With limited access to infrastructure, only a handful of human communities exist above 4,000 metres (13,000 ft) of elevation.
Many are small and have heavily specialized economies, often relying on industries such as agriculture, mining, and tourism.
An example of such a specialized town is La Rinconada, Peru, a gold-mining town and the highest elevation human habitation at 5,100 metres (16,700 ft).
A counterexample is El Alto, Bolivia, at 4,150 metres (13,620 ft), which has a highly diverse service and manufacturing economy and a population of nearly 1 million.
Traditional mountain societies rely on agriculture, with higher risk of crop failure than at lower elevations.
Minerals often occur in mountains, with mining being an important component of the economics of some mountain-based societies.
More recently, tourism has become more important to the economies of mountain communities, with developments focused around attractions such as national parks and ski resorts.
Approximately 80% of mountain people live below the poverty line.
Most of the world's rivers are fed from mountain sources, with snow acting as a storage mechanism for downstream users.
More than half of humanity depends on mountains for water.
In geopolitics, mountains are often seen as natural boundaries between polities.
Mountains often play a significant role in religion.
There are for example a number of sacred mountains within Greece such as Mount Olympus which was held to be the home of the gods.
In Japanese culture, the 3,776.
Mount Kailash, in the Tibet Autonomous Region of China, is considered to be sacred in four religions: Hinduism, Bon, Buddhism, and Jainism.
In Ireland, pilgrimages are made up the 952 metres (3,123 ft) Mount Brandon by Irish Catholics.
The Himalayan peak of Nanda Devi is associated with the Hindu goddesses Nanda and Sunanda; it has been off-limits to climbers since 1983.
Mount Ararat is a sacred mountain, as it is believed to be the biblical landing place of Noah's Ark.
In Europe and especially in the Alps, summit crosses are often erected on the tops of prominent mountains.
Heights of mountains are typically measured above sea level.
Using this metric, Mount Everest is the highest mountain on Earth, at 8,848 metres (29,029 ft).
There are at least 100 mountains with heights of over 7,200 metres (23,622 ft) above sea level, all of which are located in central and southern Asia.
The highest mountains above sea level are generally not the highest above the surrounding terrain.
There is no precise definition of surrounding base, but Denali, Mount Kilimanjaro and Nanga Parbat are possible candidates for the tallest mountain on land by this measure.
The bases of mountain islands are below sea level, and given this consideration Mauna Kea (4,207 m (13,802 ft) above sea level) is the world's tallest mountain and volcano, rising about 10,203 m (33,474 ft) from the Pacific Ocean floor.
The highest mountains are not generally the most voluminous.
Mauna Loa (4,169 m or 13,678 ft) is the largest mountain on Earth in terms of base area (about 2,000 sq mi or 5,200 km2) and volume (about 18,000 mi3 or 75,000 km3).
Mount Kilimanjaro is the largest non-shield volcano in terms of both base area (245 sq mi or 635 km2) and volume (1,150 mi3 or 4,793 km3).
Mount Logan is the largest non-volcanic mountain in base area (120 sq mi or 311 km2).
The highest mountains above sea level are also not those with peaks farthest from the centre of the Earth, because the figure of the Earth is not spherical.
Sea level closer to the equator is several miles farther from the centre of the Earth.
The summit of Chimborazo, Ecuador's tallest mountain, is usually considered to be the farthest point from the Earth's centre, although the southern summit of Peru's tallest mountain, Huascarán, is another contender.
Both have elevations above sea level more than 2 kilometres (6,600 ft) less than that of Everest.
A river is a natural stream of fresh water that flows on land or inside caves towards another body of water at a lower elevation, such as an ocean, lake, or another river.
A river may run dry before reaching the end of its course if it runs out of water, or only flow during certain seasons.
Rivers are regulated by the water cycle, the processes by which water moves around the Earth.
Water first enters rivers through precipitation, whether from rainfall, the runoff of water down a slope, the melting of glaciers or snow, or seepage from aquifers beneath the surface of the Earth.
Rivers flow in channeled watercourses and merge in confluences to form drainage basins, areas where surface water eventually flows to a common outlet.
Drainage divides keep rivers separated from other courses of water and causes upstream water within the confines of the divide to fall into the downhill stream.
Rivers have a great effect on the landscape around them.
They may regularly overflow their banks and flood the surrounding area, spreading nutrients to the surrounding area.
Sediment or alluvium carried by rivers shapes the landscape around it, forming deltas and islands where the flow slows down.
Rivers rarely run in a straight line, instead, they bend or meander; the locations of a river's banks can change frequently.
Rivers get their alluvium from erosion, which carves rock into canyons and valleys.
Rivers have sustained human and animal life for millennia, including the first human civilizations.
The organisms that live around or in a river such as fish, aquatic plants, and insects have different roles, including processing organic matter and predation.
Rivers have produced abundant resources for humans, including food, transportation, drinking water, and recreation.
Humans have engineered rivers to prevent flooding, irrigate crops, perform work with water wheels, and produce hydroelectricity from dams.
People associate rivers with life and fertility and have strong religious, political, social, and mythological attachments to them.
Rivers and river ecosystems are threatened by water pollution, climate change, and human activity.
The construction of dams, canals, levees, and other engineered structures has eliminated habitats, has caused the extinction of some species, and lowered the amount of alluvium flowing through rivers.
Decreased snowfall from climate change has resulted in less water available for rivers during the summer.
Regulation of pollution, dam removal, and sewage treatment have helped to improve water quality and restore river habitats.
A river is a natural flow of freshwater that flows on or through land towards another body of water downhill.
This flow can be into a lake, an ocean, or another river.
A stream refers to water that flows in a natural channel, a geographic feature that can contain flowing water.
A stream may also be referred to as a watercourse.
The study of the movement of water as it occurs on Earth is called hydrology, and their effect on the landscape is covered by geomorphology.
Rivers are part of the water cycle, the continuous processes by which water moves about Earth.
This means that all water that flows in rivers must ultimately come from precipitation.
The sides of rivers have land that is at a higher elevation than the river itself, and in these areas, water flows downhill into the river.
The headwaters of a river are the smaller streams that feed a river, and make up the river's source.
These streams may be small and flow rapidly down the sides of mountains.
All of the land uphill of a river that feeds it with water in this way is in that river's drainage basin or watershed.
A ridge of higher elevation land is what typically separates drainage basins; water on one side of a ridge will flow into one set of rivers, and water on the other side will flow into another.
One example of this is the Continental Divide of the Americas in the Rocky Mountains.
Water on the western side of the divide flows into the Pacific Ocean, whereas water on the other side flows into the Atlantic Ocean.
Not all precipitation flows directly into rivers; some water seeps into underground aquifers.
These, in turn, can still feed rivers via the water table, the groundwater beneath the surface of the land stored in the soil.
Water flows into rivers in places where the river's elevation is lower than that of the water table.
This phenomenon is why rivers can still flow even during times of drought.
Rivers are also fed by the melting of snow glaciers present in higher elevation regions.
In summer months, higher temperatures melt snow and ice, causing additional water to flow into rivers.
Glacier melt can supplement snow melt in times like the late summer, when there may be less snow left to melt, helping to ensure that the rivers downstream of the glaciers have a continuous supply of water.
Rivers flow downhill, with their direction determined by gravity.
A common misconception holds that all or most rivers flow from North to South, but this is not true.
As rivers flow downstream, they eventually merge to form larger rivers.
A river that feeds into another is a tributary, and the place they meet is a confluence.
Rivers must flow to lower altitudes due to gravity.
The bed of a river is typically within a river valley between hills or mountains.
Rivers flowing through an impermeable section of land such as rocks will erode the slopes on the sides of the river.
When a river carves a plateau or a similar high-elevation area, a canyon can form, with cliffs on either side of the river.
Areas of a river with softer rock weather faster than areas with harder rock, causing a difference in elevation between two points of a river.
This can cause the formation of a waterfall as the river's flow falls down a vertical drop.
A river in a permeable area does not exhibit this behavior and may even have raised banks due to sediment.
Rivers also change their landscape through their transportation of sediment, often known as alluvium when applied specifically to rivers.
This debris comes from erosion performed by the rivers themselves, debris swept into rivers by rainfall, as well as erosion caused by the slow movement of glaciers.
The sand in deserts and the sediment that forms bar islands is from rivers.
The particle size of the debris is gradually sorted by the river, with heavier particles like rocks sinking to the bottom, and finer particles like sand or silt carried further downriver.
This sediment may be deposited in river valleys or carried to the sea.
The sediment yield of a river is the quantity of sand per unit area within a watershed that is removed over a period of time.
The monitoring of the sediment yield of a river is important for ecologists to understand the health of its ecosystems, the rate of erosion of the river's environment, and the effects of human activity.
Rivers rarely run in a straight direction, instead preferring to bend or meander.
This is because any natural impediment to the flow of the river may cause the current to deflect in a different direction.
When this happens, the alluvium carried by the river can build up against this impediment, redirecting the course of the river.
The flow is then directed against the opposite bank of the river, which will erode into a more concave shape to accommodate the flow.
The bank will still block the flow, causing it to reflect in the other direction.
Thus, a bend in the river is created.
Rivers may run through low, flat regions on their way to the sea.
These places may have floodplains that are periodically flooded when there is a high level of water running through the river.
These events may be referred to as "wet seasons' and "dry seasons" when the flooding is predictable due to the climate.
The alluvium carried by rivers, laden with minerals, is deposited into the floodplain when the banks spill over, providing new nutrients to the soil, allowing them to support human activity like farming as well as a host of plant and animal life.
Deposited sediment from rivers can form temporary or long-lasting fluvial islands.
These islands exist in almost every river.
About half of all waterways on Earth are intermittent rivers, which do not always have a continuous flow of water throughout the year.
This may be because an arid climate is too dry depending on the season to support a stream, or because a river is seasonally frozen in the winter (such as in an area with substantial permafrost), or in the headwaters of rivers in mountains, where snowmelt is required to fuel the river.
These rivers can appear in a variety of climates, and still provide a habitat for aquatic life and perform other ecological functions.
Subterranean rivers may flow underground through flooded caves.
This can happen in karst systems, where rock dissolves to form caves.
These rivers provide a habitat for diverse microorganisms and have become an important target of study by microbiologists.
Other rivers and streams have been covered over or converted to run in tunnels due to human development.
These rivers do not typically host any life, and are often used only for stormwater or flood control.
One such example is the Sunswick Creek in New York City, which was covered in the 1800s and now exists only as a sewer-like pipe.
While rivers may flow into lakes or man-made features such as reservoirs, the water they contain will always tend to flow down toward the ocean or, in the case of an endorheic basin, a local low point.
However, if human activity or losses to groundwater siphon too much water away from a river for other uses, the riverbed may run dry before reaching the sea.
The outlets mouth of a river can take several forms.
Tidal rivers, often part of an estuary, have their levels rise and fall with the tide.
Since the levels of these rivers are often already at or near sea level, the flow of alluvium and the brackish water that flows in these rivers may be either upriver or downriver depending on the time of day.
Rivers that are not tidal may form deltas that continuously deposit alluvium into the sea from their mouths.
Depending on the activity of waves, the strength of the river, and the strength of the tidal current, the sediment can accumulate to form new land.
When viewed from above, a delta can appear to take the form of several triangular shapes as the river mouth appears to fan out from the original coastline.
In hydrology, a stream order is a positive integer used to describe the level of river branching in a drainage basin.
Several systems of stream order exist, one of which is the Strahler number.
In this system, the first tributaries of a river are 1st order rivers.
When two 1st order rivers merge, the resulting river is 2nd order.
If a river of a higher order and a lower order merge, the order is not incremented.
Order increments only when two rivers of the same order merge.
Stream order is correlated with and thus can be used to predict certain data points related to rivers, such as the size of the drainage basin (drainage area), and the length of the channel.
The ecosystem of a river includes the life that lives in its water, on its banks, and in the surrounding land.
The width of the channel of a river, its velocity, and how shaded it is by nearby trees.
Creatures in a river ecosystem may be divided into many roles based on the River Continuum Concept.
The role of a "grazer" or "scraper" organism is to feed on the algae that collects on rocks and plants.
Lastly, predators feed on living things to survive.
The river can then be modeled by the availability of resources for each creature's role.
A shady area with deciduous trees might experience frequent deposits of organic matter in the form of leaves.
In this type of ecosystem, collectors and shredders will be most active.
As the river becomes deeper and wider, it may move slower and receive more sunlight.
This supports invertebrates and a variety of fish, as well as scrapers feeding on algae.
Further downstream, the river may get most of its energy from organic matter that was already processed upstream by collectors and shredders.
Predators may be more active here, including fish that feed on plants, plankton, and other fish.
The flood pulse concept focuses on habitats that flood seasonally, including lakes and marshes.
The land that interfaces with a water body is that body's riparian zone.
Plants in the riparian zone of a river help stabilize its banks to prevent erosion and filter alluvium deposited by the river on the shore, including processing the nitrogen and other nutrients it contains.
Forests in a riparian zone also provide important animal habitats.
River ecosystems have also been categorized based on the variety of aquatic life they can sustain, also known as the fish zonation concept.
Smaller rivers can only sustain smaller fish that can comfortably fit in its waters, whereas larger rivers can contain both small fish and large fish.
This means that larger rivers can host a larger variety of species.
This is analogous to the species-area relationship, the concept of larger habitats being host to more species.
In this case, it is known as the species-discharge relationship, referring specifically to the discharge of a river, the amount of water passing through it at a particular time.
The flow of a river can act as a means of transportation for different organisms, as well as a barrier.
For example, the Amazon River is so wide in parts that the variety of species on either side of its basin are distinct.
Some fish may swim upstream to spawn as part of a seasonal migration.
Species that travel from the sea to breed in freshwater rivers are anadromous, and fish that travel from rivers to the ocean to breed are catadromous.
Salmons are anadromous fish that may die in the river after spawning, contributing nutrients back to the river ecosystem.
Fungal spores (aquatic hyphomycetes) also move via stream currents, and most species depend on this to spread between substrates.
Modern river engineering involves a large-scale collection of independent river engineering structures that have the goal of flood control, improved navigation, recreation, and ecosystem management.
Many of these projects have the effect of normalizing the effects of rivers; the greatest floods are smaller and more predictable, and larger sections are open for navigation by boats and other watercraft.
A major effect of river engineering has been a reduced sediment output of large rivers.
For example, the Mississippi River produced 400 million tons of sediment per year.
Due to the construction of reservoirs, sediment buildup in man-made levees, and the removal of natural banks replaced with revetments, this sediment output has been reduced by 60%.
The most basic river projects involve the clearing of obstructions like fallen trees.
This can scale up to dredging, the excavation of sediment buildup in a channel, to provide a deeper area for navigation.
These activities require regular maintenance as the location of the river banks changes over time, floods bring foreign objects into the river, and natural sediment buildup continues.
Artificial channels are often constructed to "cut off" winding sections of a river with a shorter path, or to direct the flow of a river in a straighter direction.
This effect, known as channelization, has made the distance required to traverse the Missouri River in 116 kilometres (72 mi) shorter.
Dikes are channels built perpendicular to the flow of the river beneath its surface.
These help rivers flow straighter by increasing the speed of the water at the middle of the channel, helping to control floods.
Levees are also used for this purpose.
They can be thought of as dams constructed on the sides of rivers, meant to hold back water from flooding the surrounding area during periods of high rainfall.
They are often constructed by building up the natural terrain with soil or clay.
Some levees are supplemented with floodways, channels used to redirect floodwater away from farms and populated areas.
Dams restrict the flow of water through a river.
They can be built for navigational purposes, providing a higher level of water upstream for boats to travel in.
They may also be used for hydroelectricity, or power generation from rivers.
Dams typically transform a section of the river behind them into a lake or reservoir.
This can provide nearby cities with a predictable supply of drinking water.
Hydroelectricity is desirable as a form of renewable energy that does not require any inputs beyond the river itself.
Dams are very common worldwide, with at least 75,000 higher than 6 feet (1.
Globally, reservoirs created by dams cover 193,500 square miles (501,000 km2).
Dam-building reached a peak in the 1970s, when between two or three dams were completed every day, and has since begun to decline.
New dam projects are primarily focused in China, India, and other areas in Asia.
The first civilizations of Earth were born on floodplains between 5,500 and 3,500 years ago.
The freshwater, fertile soil, and transportation provided by rivers helped create the conditions for complex societies to emerge.
Three such civilizations were the Sumerians in the Tigris–Euphrates river system, the Ancient Egyptian civilization in the Nile, and the Indus Valley Civilization on the Indus River.
The desert climates of the surrounding areas made these societies especially reliant on rivers for survival, leading to people clustering in these areas to form the first cities.
It is also thought that these civilizations were the first to organize the irrigation of desert environments for growing food.
Growing food at scale allowed people to specialize in other roles, form hierarchies, and organize themselves in new ways, leading to the birth of civilization.
In pre-industrial society, rivers were a source of transportation and abundant resources.
Many civilizations depended on what resources were local to them to survive.
Shipping of commodities, especially the floating of wood on rivers to transport it, was especially important.
Rivers also were an important source of drinking water.
For civilizations built around rivers, fish were an important part of the diet of humans.
Some rivers supported fishing activities, but were ill-suited to farming, such as those in the Pacific Northwest.
Other animals that live in or near rivers like frogs, mussels, and beavers could provide food and valuable goods such as fur.
Humans have been building infrastructure to use rivers for thousands of years.
The Sadd el-Kafara dam near Cairo, Egypt, is an ancient dam built on the Nile 4,500 years ago.
The Ancient Roman civilization used aqueducts to transport water to urban areas.
Spanish Muslims used mills and water wheels beginning in the seventh century.
Between 130 and 1492, larger dams were built in Japan, Afghanistan, and India, including 20 dams higher than 15 metres (49 ft).
Canals began to be cut in Egypt as early as 3000 BC, and the mechanical shadoof began to be used to raise the elevation of water.
Drought years harmed crop yields, and leaders of society were incentivized to ensure regular water and food availability to remain in power.
Engineering projects like the shadoof and canals could help prevent these crises.
Despite this, there is evidence that floodplain-based civilizations may have been abandoned occasionally at a large scale.
This has been attributed to unusually large floods destroying infrastructure; however, there is evidence that permanent changes to climate causing higher aridity and lower river flow may have been the determining factor in what river civilizations succeeded or dissolved.
Water wheels began to be used at least 2,000 years ago to harness the energy of rivers.
Water wheels turn an axle that can supply rotational energy to move water into aqueducts, work metal using a trip hammer, and grind grains with a millstone.
In the Middle Ages, water mills began to automate many aspects of manual labor, and spread rapidly.
By 1300, there were at least 10,000 mills in England alone.
A medieval watermill could do the work of 30–60 human workers.
Water mills were often used in conjunction with dams to focus and increase the speed of the water.
Water wheels continued to be used up to and through the Industrial Revolution as a source of power for textile mills and other factories, but were eventually supplanted by steam power.
Rivers became more industrialized with the growth of technology and the human population.
As fish and water could be brought from elsewhere, and goods and people could be transported via railways, pre-industrial river uses diminished in favor of more complex uses.
This meant that the local ecosystems of rivers needed less protection as humans became less reliant on them for their continued flourishing.
River engineering began to develop projects that enabled industrial hydropower, canals for the more efficient movement of goods, as well as projects for flood prevention.
River transportation has historically been significantly cheaper and faster than transportation by land.
Rivers helped fuel urbanization as goods such as grain and fuel could be floated downriver to supply cities with resources.
River transportation is also important for the lumber industry, as logs can be shipped via river.
Countries with dense forests and networks of rivers like Sweden have historically benefited the most from this method of trade.
The rise of highways and the automobile has made this practice less common.
One of the first large canals was the Canal du Midi, connecting rivers within France to create a path from the Atlantic Ocean to the Mediterranean Sea.
The nineteenth century saw canal-building become more common, with the U.
Rivers began to be used by cargo ships at a larger scale, and these canals were used in conjunction with river engineering projects like dredging and straightening to ensure the efficient flow of goods.
One of the largest such projects is that of the Mississippi River, whose drainage basin covers 40% of the contiguous United States.
The river was then used for shipping crops from the American Midwest and cotton from the American South to other states as well as the Atlantic Ocean.
The role of urban rivers has evolved from when they were a center of trade, food, and transportation to modern times when these uses are less necessary.
Rivers remain central to the cultural identity of cities and nations.
Famous examples include the River Thames's relationship to London, the Seine to Paris, and the Hudson River to New York City.
The restoration of water quality and recreation to urban rivers has been a goal of modern administrations.
For example, swimming was banned in the Seine for over 100 years due to concerns about pollution and the spread of E.
Another example is the restoration of the Isar in Munich from being a fully canalized channel with hard embankments to being wider with naturally sloped banks and vegetation.
This has improved wildlife habitat in the Isar, and provided more opportunities for recreation in the river.
As a natural barrier, rivers are often used as a border between countries, cities, and other territories.
For example, the Lamari River in New Guinea separates the Angu and the Fore people in New Guinea.
The two cultures speak different languages and rarely mix.
The traditional northern border of the Roman Empire was the Danube, a river that today forms the border of Hungary and Slovakia.
Since the flow of a river is rarely static, the exact location of a river border may be called into question by countries.
The Rio Grande between the United States and Mexico is regulated by the International Boundary and Water Commission to manage the right to fresh water from the river, as well as mark the exact location of the border.
Up to 60% of fresh water used by countries comes from rivers that cross international borders.
This can cause disputes between countries that live upstream and downstream of the river.
A country that is downstream of another may object to the upstream country diverting too much water for agricultural uses, pollution, as well as the creation of dams that change the river's flow characteristics.
For example, Egypt has an agreement with Sudan requiring a specific minimum volume of water to pass into the Nile yearly over the Aswan Dam, to maintain both countries access to water.
The importance of rivers throughout human history has given them an association with life and fertility.
They have also become associated with the reverse, death and destruction, especially through floods.
This power has caused rivers to have a central role in religion, ritual, and mythology.
In Greek mythology, the underworld is bordered by several rivers.
Ancient Greeks believed that the souls of those who perished had to be borne across the River Styx on a boat by Charon in exchange for money.
Souls that were judged to be good were admitted to Elysium and permitted to drink water from the River Lethe to forget their previous life.
Rivers also appear in descriptions of paradise in Abrahamic religions, beginning with the story of Genesis.
A river beginning in the Garden of Eden waters the garden and then splits into four rivers that flow to provide water to the world.
These rivers include the Tigris and Euphrates, and two rivers that are possibly apocryphal but may refer to the Nile and the Ganges.
The Quran describes these four rivers as flowing with water, milk, wine, and honey, respectively.
The book of Genesis also contains a story of a great flood.
Similar myths are present in the Epic of Gilgamesh, Sumerian mythology, and in other cultures.
In Genesis, the flood's role was to cleanse Earth of the wrongdoing of humanity.
The act of water working to cleanse humans in a ritualistic sense has been compared to the Christian ritual of baptism, famously the Baptism of Jesus in the Jordan River.
Floods also appear in Norse mythology, where the world is said to emerge from a void that eleven rivers flowed into.
Aboriginal Australian religion and Mesoamerican mythology also have stories of floods, some of which contain no survivors, unlike the Abrahamic flood.
Along with mythological rivers, religions have also cared for specific rivers as sacred rivers.
The Ancient Celtic religion saw rivers as goddesses.
The Nile had many gods attached to it.
The tears of the goddess Isis were said to be the cause of the river's yearly flooding, itself personified by the goddess Hapi.
Many African religions regard certain rivers as the originator of life.
In Yoruba religion, Yemọja rules over the Ogun River in modern-day Nigeria and is responsible for creating all children and fish.
Some sacred rivers have religious prohibitions attached to them, such as not being allowed to drink from them or ride in a boat along certain stretches.
In these religions, such as that of the Altai in Russia, the river is considered a living being that must be afforded respect.
Rivers are some of the most sacred places in Hinduism.
There is archeological evidence that mass ritual bathing in rivers at least 5,000 years ago in the Indus river valley.
While most rivers in India are revered, the Ganges is most sacred.
The river has a central role in various Hindu myths, and its water is said to have properties of healing as well as absolution from sins.
Hindus believe that when the cremated remains of a person is released into the Ganges, their soul is released from the mortal world.
Freshwater fish make up 40% of the world's fish species, but 20% of these species are known to have gone extinct in recent years.
Human uses of rivers make these species especially vulnerable.
Dams and other engineered changes to rivers can block the migration routes of fish and destroy habitats.
Rivers that flow freely from headwaters to the sea have better water quality, and also retain their ability to transport nutrient-rich alluvium and other organic material downstream, keeping the ecosystem healthy.
The creation of a lake changes the habitat of that portion of water, and blocks the transportation of sediment, as well as preventing the natural meandering of the river.
Dams block the migration of fish such as salmon for which fish ladder and other bypass systems have been attempted, but these are not always effective.
Pollution from factories and urban areas can also damage water quality.
It has been found in the bodies of humans and animals worldwide, as well as in the soil, with potentially negative health effects.
Research into how to remove it from the environment, and how harmful exposure is, is ongoing.
Fertilizer from farms can lead to a proliferation of algae on the surface of rivers and oceans, which prevents oxygen and light from dissolving into water, making it impossible for underwater life to survive in these so-called dead zones.
Urban rivers are typically surrounded by impermeable surfaces like stone, asphalt, and concrete.
Cities often have storm drains that direct this water to rivers.
This can cause flooding risk as large amounts of water are directed into the rivers.
Due to these impermeable surfaces, these rivers often have very little alluvium carried in them, causing more erosion once the river exits the impermeable area.
It has historically been common for sewage to be directed directly to rivers via sewer systems without being treated, along with pollution from industry.
This has resulted in a loss of animal and plant life in urban rivers, as well as the spread of waterborne diseases such as cholera.
In modern times, sewage treatment and controls on pollution from factories have improved the water quality of urban rivers.
Climate change can change the flooding cycles and water supply available to rivers.
Floods can be larger and more destructive than expected, causing damage to the surrounding areas.
Floods can also wash unhealthy chemicals and sediment into rivers.
Droughts can be deeper and longer, causing rivers to run dangerously low.
This is in part because of a projected loss of snowpack in mountains, meaning that melting snow cannot replenish rivers during warm summer months, leading to lower water levels.
Lower-level rivers also have warmer temperatures, threatening species like salmon that prefer colder upstream temperatures.
Attempts have been made to regulate the exploitation of rivers to preserve their ecological functions.
Many wetland areas have become protected from development.
Water restrictions can prevent the complete draining of rivers.
Limits on the construction of dams, as well as dam removal, can restore the natural habitats of river species.
Regulators can also ensure regular releases of water from dams to keep animal habitats supplied with water.
Limits on pollutants like pesticides can help improve water quality.
Today, the surface of Mars does not have liquid water.
All water on Mars is part of permafrost ice caps, or trace amounts of water vapor in the atmosphere.
However, there is evidence that rivers flowed on Mars for at least 100,000 years.
The Hellas Planitia is a crater left behind by an impact from an asteroid.
It has sedimentary rock that was formed 3.
High resolution images of the surface of the plain show evidence of a river network, and even river deltas.
These images reveal channels formed in the rock, recognized by geologists who study rivers on Earth as being formed by rivers, as well as "bench and slope" landforms, outcroppings of rock that show evidence of river erosion.
Not only do these formations suggest that rivers once existed, but that they flowed for extensive time periods, and were part of a water cycle that involved precipitation.
The term flumen, in planetary geology, refers to channels on Saturn's moon Titan that may carry liquid.
Titan's rivers flow with liquid methane and ethane.
There are river valleys that exhibit wave erosion, seas, and oceans.
Scientists hope to study these systems to see how coasts erode without the influence of human activity, something that is not possible when studying terrestrial rivers.
A desert is a landscape where little precipitation occurs and, consequently, living conditions create unique biomes and ecosystems.
The lack of vegetation exposes the unprotected surface of the ground to denudation.
About one-third of the land surface of the Earth is arid or semi-arid.
This includes much of the polar regions, where little precipitation occurs, and which are sometimes called polar deserts or "cold deserts".
Deserts can be classified by the amount of precipitation that falls, by the temperature that prevails, by the causes of desertification or by their geographical location.
Deserts are formed by weathering processes as large variations in temperature between day and night strain the rocks, which consequently break into pieces.
Although rain seldom occurs in deserts, there are occasional downpours that can result in flash floods.
Rain falling on hot rocks can cause them to shatter, and the resulting fragments and rubble strewn over the desert floor are further eroded by the wind.
This picks up particles of sand and dust, which can remain airborne for extended periods – sometimes causing the formation of sand storms or dust storms.
Wind-blown sand grains striking any solid object in their path can abrade the surface.
Rocks are smoothed down, and the wind sorts sand into uniform deposits.
The grains end up as level sheets of sand or are piled high in billowing dunes.
Other deserts are flat, stony plains where all the fine material has been blown away and the surface consists of a mosaic of smooth stones, often forming desert pavements, and little further erosion occurs.
Other desert features include rock outcrops, exposed bedrock and clays once deposited by flowing water.
Temporary lakes may form and salt pans may be left when waters evaporate.
There may be underground water sources in the form of springs and seepages from aquifers.
Where these are found, oases can occur.
Plants and animals living in the desert need special adaptations to survive in the harsh environment.
Plants tend to be tough and wiry with small or no leaves, water-resistant cuticles, and often spines to deter herbivory.
Some annual plants germinate, bloom, and die within a few weeks after rainfall, while other long-lived plants survive for years and have deep root systems that are able to tap underground moisture.
Animals need to keep cool and find enough food and water to survive.
Many are nocturnal and stay in the shade or underground during the day's heat.
They tend to be efficient at conserving water, extracting most of their needs from their food and concentrating their urine.
Some animals remain in a state of dormancy for long periods, ready to become active again during the rare rainfall.
They then reproduce rapidly while conditions are favorable before returning to dormancy.
People have struggled to live in deserts and the surrounding semi-arid lands for millennia.
Nomads have moved their flocks and herds to wherever grazing is available, and oases have provided opportunities for a more settled way of life.
The cultivation of semi-arid regions encourages erosion of soil and is one of the causes of increased desertification.
Desert farming is possible with the aid of irrigation, and the Imperial Valley in California provides an example of how previously barren land can be made productive by the import of water from an outside source.
Many trade routes have been forged across deserts, especially across the Sahara, and traditionally were used by caravans of camels carrying salt, gold, ivory and other goods.
Large numbers of slaves were also taken northwards across the Sahara.
Some mineral extraction also takes place in deserts, and the uninterrupted sunlight gives potential for capturing large quantities of solar energy.
English desert and its Romance cognates (including Italian and Portuguese deserto, French désert and Spanish desierto) all come from the ecclesiastical Latin dēsertum (originally "an abandoned place"), a participle of dēserere, "to abandon".
The correlation between aridity and sparse population is complex and dynamic, varying by culture, era, and technologies; thus the use of the word desert can cause confusion.
In English before the 20th century, desert was often used in the sense of "unpopulated area", without specific reference to aridity; but today the word is most often used in its climate-science sense (an area of low precipitation).
Phrases such as "desert island" and "Great American Desert", or Shakespeare's "deserts of Bohemia" (The Winter's Tale) in previous centuries did not necessarily imply sand or aridity; their focus was the sparse population.
Deserts occupy about one third of Earth's land surface.
Bottomlands may be salt-covered flats.
Eolian processes are major factors in shaping desert landscapes.
Polar deserts (also seen as "cold deserts") have similar features, except the main form of precipitation is snow rather than rain.
Antarctica is the world's largest cold desert (composed of about 98% thick continental ice sheet and 2% barren rock).
Some of the barren rock is to be found in the so-called Dry Valleys of Antarctica that almost never get snow, which can have ice-encrusted saline lakes that suggest evaporation far greater than the rare snowfall due to the strong katabatic winds that even evaporate ice.
Deserts, both hot and cold, play a part in moderating Earth's temperature, because they reflect more of the incoming light and their albedo is higher than that of forests or the sea.
A desert is a region of land that is very dry because it receives low amounts of precipitation (usually in the form of rain, but it may be snow, mist or fog), often has little coverage by plants, and in which streams dry up unless they are supplied by water from outside the area.
Deserts generally receive less than 250 mm (10 in) of precipitation each year.
The potential evapotranspiration may be large but (in the absence of available water) the actual evapotranspiration may be close to zero.
Semi-deserts are regions which receive between 250 and 500 mm (10 and 20 in) and when clad in grass, these are known as steppes.
Most deserts on Earth such as the Sahara Desert, Grand Australian Desert and the Great Basin Desert, occur in low altitudes.
One of the driest places on Earth is the Atacama Desert.
It is virtually devoid of life because it is blocked from receiving precipitation by the Andes mountains to the east and the Chilean Coast Range to the west.
The cold Humboldt Current and the anticyclone of the Pacific are essential to keep the dry climate of the Atacama.
The average precipitation in the Chilean region of Antofagasta is just 1 mm (0.
Some weather stations in the Atacama have never received rain.
Evidence suggests that the Atacama may not have had any significant rainfall from 1570 to 1971.
It is so arid that mountains that reach as high as 6,885 m (22,589 ft) are completely free of glaciers and, in the southern part from 25°S to 27°S, may have been glacier-free throughout the Quaternary, though permafrost extends down to an altitude of 4,400 m (14,400 ft) and is continuous above 5,600 m (18,400 ft).
Nevertheless, there is some plant life in the Atacama, in the form of specialist plants that obtain moisture from dew and the fogs that blow in from the Pacific.
When rain falls in deserts, as it occasionally does, it is often with great violence.
The desert surface is evidence of this with dry stream channels known as arroyos or wadis meandering across its surface.
These can experience flash floods, becoming raging torrents with surprising rapidity after a storm that may be many kilometers away.
Most deserts are in basins with no drainage to the sea but some are crossed by exotic rivers sourced in mountain ranges or other high rainfall areas beyond their borders.
The River Nile, the Colorado River and the Yellow River do this, losing much of their water through evaporation as they pass through the desert and raising groundwater levels nearby.
There may also be underground sources of water in deserts in the form of springs, aquifers, underground rivers or lakes.
Where these lie close to the surface, wells can be dug and oases may form where plant and animal life can flourish.
The Nubian Sandstone Aquifer System under the Sahara Desert is the largest known accumulation of fossil water.
The Great Man-Made River is a scheme launched by Libya's Muammar Gaddafi to tap this aquifer and supply water to coastal cities.
Kharga Oasis in Egypt is 150 km (93 mi) long and is the largest oasis in the Libyan Desert.
A lake occupied this depression in ancient times and thick deposits of sandy-clay resulted.
Wells are dug to extract water from the porous sandstone that lies underneath.
Seepages may occur in the walls of canyons and pools may survive in deep shade near the dried up watercourse below.
Lakes may form in basins where there is sufficient precipitation or meltwater from glaciers above.
They are usually shallow and saline, and wind blowing over their surface can cause stress, moving the water over nearby low-lying areas.
When the lakes dry up, they leave a crust or hardpan behind.
This area of deposited clay, silt or sand is known as a playa.
The deserts of North America have more than one hundred playas, many of them relics of Lake Bonneville which covered parts of Utah, Nevada and Idaho during the last ice age when the climate was colder and wetter.
These include the Great Salt Lake, Utah Lake, Sevier Lake and many dry lake beds.
The smooth flat surfaces of playas have been used for attempted vehicle speed records at Black Rock Desert and Bonneville Speedway and the United States Air Force uses Rogers Dry Lake in the Mojave Desert as runways for aircraft and the Space Shuttle.
Deserts have been defined and classified in a number of ways, generally combining total precipitation, number of days on which this falls, temperature, and humidity, and sometimes additional factors.
For example, Phoenix, Arizona, receives less than 250 mm (9.
The North Slope of Alaska's Brooks Range also receives less than 250 mm (9.
Other regions of the world have cold deserts, including areas of the Himalayas and other high-altitude areas in other parts of the world.
Polar deserts cover much of the ice-free areas of the Arctic and Antarctic.
A non-technical definition is that deserts are those parts of Earth's surface that have insufficient vegetation cover to support a human population.
Potential evapotranspiration supplements the measurement of precipitation in providing a scientific measurement-based definition of a desert.
The water budget of an area can be calculated using the formula P − PE ± S, wherein P is precipitation, PE is potential evapotranspiration rates and S is the amount of surface storage of water.
Evapotranspiration is the combination of water loss through atmospheric evaporation and through the life processes of plants.
Potential evapotranspiration, then, is the amount of water that could evaporate in any given region.
As an example, Tucson, Arizona receives about 300 mm (12 in) of rain per year, however about 2,500 mm (98 in) of water could evaporate over the course of a year.
In other words, about eight times more water could evaporate from the region than actually falls as rain.
Rates of evapotranspiration in cold regions such as Alaska are much lower because of the lack of heat to aid in the evaporation process.
Deserts are sometimes classified as "hot" or "cold", "semiarid" or "coastal".
The characteristics of hot deserts include high temperatures in summer; greater evaporation than precipitation, usually exacerbated by high temperatures, strong winds and lack of cloud cover; considerable variation in the occurrence of precipitation, its intensity and distribution; and low humidity.
Winter temperatures vary considerably between different deserts and are often related to the location of the desert on the continental landmass and the latitude.
Daily variations in temperature can be as great as 22 °C (40 °F) or more, with heat loss by radiation at night being increased by the clear skies.
Cold deserts, sometimes known as temperate deserts, occur at higher latitudes than hot deserts, and the aridity is caused by the dryness of the air.
Some cold deserts are far from the ocean and others are separated by mountain ranges from the sea, and in both cases, there is insufficient moisture in the air to cause much precipitation.
The largest of these deserts are found in Central Asia.
Others occur on the eastern side of the Rocky Mountains, the eastern side of the southern Andes and in southern Australia.
Polar deserts are a particular class of cold desert.
The air is very cold and carries little moisture so little precipitation occurs and what does fall, usually snow, is carried along in the often strong wind and may form blizzards, drifts and dunes similar to those caused by dust and sand in other desert regions.
In Antarctica, for example, the annual precipitation is about 50 mm (2 in) on the central plateau and some ten times that amount on some major peninsulas.
Based on precipitation alone, hyperarid deserts receive less than 25 mm (1 in) of rainfall a year; they have no annual seasonal cycle of precipitation and experience twelve-month periods with no rainfall at all.
Arid deserts receive between 25 and 200 mm (1 and 8 in) in a year and semiarid deserts between 200 and 500 mm (8 and 20 in).
However, such factors as the temperature, humidity, rate of evaporation and evapotranspiration, and the moisture storage capacity of the ground have a marked effect on the degree of aridity and the plant and animal life that can be sustained.
Rain falling in the cold season may be more effective at promoting plant growth, and defining the boundaries of deserts and the semiarid regions that surround them on the grounds of precipitation alone is problematic.
A semi-arid desert or a steppe is a version of the arid desert with much more rainfall, vegetation and higher humidity.
These regions feature a semi-arid climate and are less extreme than regular deserts.
Like arid deserts, temperatures can vary greatly in semi deserts.
They share some characteristics of a true desert and are usually located at the edge of deserts and continental dry areas.
They usually receive precipitation from 250 to 500 mm (9.
Semi-deserts can be found in the high elevations of the Tabernas Desert (and some parts of the Spanish Plateau), The Sahel, The Eurasian Steppe, most of Central Asia, the Western US, most of Northern Mexico, portions of South America (especially in Argentina) and the Australian Outback.
They usually feature BSh (hot steppe) or BSk (temperate steppe) in the Köppen climate classification.
Coastal deserts are mostly found on the western edges of continental land masses in regions where cold currents approach the land or cold water upwellings rise from the ocean depths.
The cool winds crossing this water pick up little moisture and the coastal regions have low temperatures and very low rainfall, the main precipitation being in the form of fog and dew (→ fog desert).
The range of temperatures on a daily and annual scale is relatively low, being 11 °C (20 °F) and 5 °C (9 °F) respectively in the Atacama Desert.
Deserts of this type are often long and narrow and bounded to the east by mountain ranges.
They occur in Namibia, Chile, southern California and Baja California.
Other coastal deserts influenced by cold currents are found in Western Australia, the Arabian Peninsula and Horn of Africa, and the western fringes of the Sahara.
In 1961, Peveril Meigs divided desert regions on Earth into three categories according to the amount of precipitation they received.
In this now widely accepted system, extremely arid lands have at least twelve consecutive months without precipitation, arid lands have less than 250 mm (9.
Both extremely arid and arid lands are considered to be deserts while semiarid lands are generally referred to as steppes when they are grasslands.
Deserts are also classified, according to their geographical location and dominant weather pattern, as trade wind, mid-latitude, rain shadow, coastal, monsoon, or polar deserts.
Trade wind deserts occur either side of the horse latitudes at 30° to 35° North and South.
These belts are associated with the subtropical anticyclone and the large-scale descent of dry air.
The Sahara Desert is of this type.
Mid-latitude deserts occur between 30° and 50° North and South.
They are mostly in areas remote from the sea where most of the moisture has already precipitated from the prevailing winds.
They include the Tengger and Sonoran Deserts.
Monsoon deserts are similar.
They occur in regions where large temperature differences occur between sea and land.
Moist warm air rises over the land, deposits its water content and circulates back to sea.
Further inland, areas receive very little precipitation.
The Thar Desert near the India/Pakistan border is of this type.
In some parts of the world, deserts are created by a rain shadow effect.
Orographic lift occurs as air masses rise to pass over high ground.
In the process they cool and lose much of their moisture by precipitation on the windward slope of the mountain range.
When they descend on the leeward side, they warm and their capacity to hold moisture increases so an area with relatively little precipitation occurs.
The Taklamakan Desert is an example, lying in the rain shadow of the Himalayas and receiving less than 38 mm (1.
Other areas are arid by virtue of being a very long way from the nearest available sources of moisture.
Montane deserts are arid places with a very high altitude; the most prominent example is found north of the Himalayas, in the Kunlun Mountains and the Tibetan Plateau.
Many locations within this category have elevations exceeding 3,000 m (9,800 ft) and the thermal regime can be hemiboreal.
These places owe their profound aridity (the average annual precipitation is often less than 40 mm or 1.
Montane deserts are normally cold, or may be scorchingly hot by day and very cold by night as is true of the northeastern slopes of Mount Kilimanjaro.
Polar deserts such as McMurdo Dry Valleys remain ice-free because of the dry katabatic winds that flow downhill from the surrounding mountains.
Former desert areas presently in non-arid environments, such as the Sandhills in Nebraska, are known as paleodeserts.
In the Köppen climate classification system, deserts are classed as BWh (hot desert) or BWk (temperate desert).
In the Thornthwaite climate classification system, deserts would be classified as arid megathermal climates.
Polar deserts are a type of cold desert.
While they do not lack water, having a persistent cover of snow and ice, this is merely due to marginal evaporation rates and low precipitation.
The McMurdo dry valleys of Antarctica, which lack water (whether rain, ice, or snow) much like a non-polar desert and even have such desert features as hypersaline lakes and intermittent streams that resemble (except for being frozen at their surfaces) hot or cold deserts for extreme aridity and lack of precipitation of any kind.
Extreme winds and not seasonal heat desiccate these nearly-lifeless terrains.
The concept of "biological desert" redefines the concept of desert, without the characteristic of aridity, not lacking water, but instead lacking life.
Such places can be so-called "ocean deserts", which are mostly at the centers of gyres, but also hypoxic or anoxic waters such as dead zones.
Deserts usually have a large diurnal and seasonal temperature range, with high daytime temperatures falling sharply at night.
The diurnal range may be as much as 20 to 30 °C (36 to 54 °F) and the rock surface experiences even greater temperature differentials.
During the day the sky is usually clear and most of the sun's radiation reaches the ground, but as soon as the sun sets, the desert cools quickly by radiating heat into space.
In hot deserts, the temperature during daytime can exceed 45 °C (113 °F) in summer and plunge below freezing point at night during winter.
Such large temperature variations have a destructive effect on the exposed rocky surfaces.
The repeated fluctuations put a strain on exposed rock and the flanks of mountains crack and shatter.
Fragmented strata slide down into the valleys where they continue to break into pieces due to the relentless sun by day and chill by night.
Successive strata are exposed to further weathering.
The relief of the internal pressure that has built up in rocks that have been underground for aeons can cause them to shatter.
Exfoliation also occurs when the outer surfaces of rocks split off in flat flakes.
This is believed to be caused by the stresses put on the rock by repeated thermal expansions and contractions which induces fracturing parallel to the original surface.
Chemical weathering processes probably play a more important role in deserts than was previously thought.
The necessary moisture may be present in the form of dew or mist.
Ground water may be drawn to the surface by evaporation and the formation of salt crystals may dislodge rock particles as sand or disintegrate rocks by exfoliation.
Shallow caves are sometimes formed at the base of cliffs by this means.
As the desert mountains decay, large areas of shattered rock and rubble occur.
The process continues and the end products are either dust or sand.
Dust is formed from solidified clay or volcanic deposits whereas sand results from the fragmentation of harder granites, limestone and sandstone.
There is a certain critical size (about 0.
As the mountains are eroded, more and more sand is created.
At high wind speeds, sand grains are picked up off the surface and blown along, a process known as saltation.
The whirling airborne grains act as a sand blasting mechanism which grinds away solid objects in its path as the kinetic energy of the wind is transferred to the ground.
The sand eventually ends up deposited in level areas known as sand-fields or sand-seas, or piled up in dunes.
Many people think of deserts as consisting of extensive areas of billowing sand dunes because that is the way they are often depicted on TV and in films, but deserts do not always look like this.
Across the world, around 20% of desert is sand, varying from only 2% in North America to 30% in Australia and over 45% in Central Asia.
Where sand does occur, it is usually in large quantities in the form of sand sheets or extensive areas of dunes.
A sand sheet is a near-level, firm expanse of partially consolidated particles in a layer that varies from a few centimeters to a few meters thick.
The structure of the sheet consists of thin horizontal layers of coarse silt and very fine to medium grain sand, separated by layers of coarse sand and pea-gravel which are a single grain thick.
These larger particles anchor the other particles in place and may also be packed together on the surface so as to form a miniature desert pavement.
Small ripples form on the sand sheet when the wind exceeds 24 km/h (15 mph).
They form perpendicular to the wind direction and gradually move across the surface as the wind continues to blow.
The distance between their crests corresponds to the average length of jumps made by particles during saltation.
The ripples are ephemeral and a change in wind direction causes them to reorganise.
Sand dunes are accumulations of windblown sand piled up in mounds or ridges.
They form downwind of copious sources of dry, loose sand and occur when topographic and climatic conditions cause airborne particles to settle.
As the wind blows, saltation and creep take place on the windward side of the dune and individual grains of sand move uphill.
When they reach the crest, they cascade down the far side.
The upwind slope typically has a gradient of 10° to 20° while the lee slope is around 32°, the angle at which loose dry sand will slip.
As this wind-induced movement of sand grains takes place, the dune moves slowly across the surface of the ground.
Dunes are sometimes solitary, but they are more often grouped together in dune fields.
When these are extensive, they are known as sand seas or ergs.
The shape of the dune depends on the characteristics of the prevailing wind.
Barchan dunes are produced by strong winds blowing across a level surface and are crescent-shaped with the concave side away from the wind.
When there are two directions from which winds regularly blow, a series of long, linear dunes known as seif dunes may form.
These also occur parallel to a strong wind that blows in one general direction.
Transverse dunes run at a right angle to the prevailing wind direction.
Star dunes are formed by variable winds, and have several ridges and slip faces radiating from a central point.
They tend to grow vertically; they can reach a height of 500 m (1,600 ft), making them the tallest type of dune.
Rounded mounds of sand without a slip face are the rare dome dunes, found on the upwind edges of sand seas.
In deserts where large amounts of limestone mountains surround a closed basin, such as at White Sands National Park in south-central New Mexico, occasional storm runoff transports dissolved limestone and gypsum into a low-lying pan within the basin where the water evaporates, depositing the gypsum and forming crystals known as selenite.
The crystals left behind by this process are eroded by the wind and deposited as vast white dune fields that resemble snow-covered landscapes.
These types of dune are rare, and only form in closed arid basins that retain the highly soluble gypsum that would otherwise be washed into the sea.
A large part of the surface area of the world's deserts consists of flat, stone-covered plains dominated by wind erosion.
In "eolian deflation", the wind continually removes fine-grained material, which becomes wind-blown sand.
This exposes coarser-grained material, mainly pebbles with some larger stones or cobbles, leaving a desert pavement, an area of land overlaid by closely packed smooth stones forming a tessellated mosaic.
Different theories exist as to how exactly the pavement is formed.
It may be that after the sand and dust is blown away by the wind the stones jiggle themselves into place; alternatively, stones previously below ground may in some way work themselves to the surface.
Very little further erosion takes place after the formation of a pavement, and the ground becomes stable.
Evaporation brings moisture to the surface by capillary action and calcium salts may be precipitated, binding particles together to form a desert conglomerate.
In time, bacteria that live on the surface of the stones accumulate a film of minerals and clay particles, forming a shiny brown coating known as desert varnish.
Other non-sandy deserts consist of exposed outcrops of bedrock, dry soils or aridisols, and a variety of landforms affected by flowing water, such as alluvial fans, sinks or playas, temporary or permanent lakes, and oases.
A hamada is a type of desert landscape consisting of a high rocky plateau where the sand has been removed by aeolian processes.
Other landforms include plains largely covered by gravels and angular boulders, from which the finer particles have been stripped by the wind.
These are called "reg" in the western Sahara, "serir" in the eastern Sahara, "gibber plains" in Australia and "saï" in central Asia.
The Tassili Plateau in Algeria is a jumble of eroded sandstone outcrops, canyons, blocks, pinnacles, fissures, slabs and ravines.
In some places the wind has carved holes or arches, and in others, it has created mushroom-like pillars narrower at the base than the top.
On the Colorado Plateau, it is water that has been the prevailing eroding force.
Here, rivers, such as the Colorado, have cut their way over the millennia through the high desert floor, creating canyons that are over a mile (6,000 feet or 1,800 meters) deep in places, exposing strata that are over two billion years old.
Sand and dust storms are natural events that occur in arid regions where the land is not protected by a covering of vegetation.
Dust storms usually start in desert margins rather than the deserts themselves where the finer materials have already been blown away.
As a steady wind begins to blow, fine particles lying on the exposed ground begin to vibrate.
At greater wind speeds, some particles are lifted into the air stream.
When they land, they strike other particles which may be jerked into the air in their turn, starting a chain reaction.
Once ejected, these particles move in one of three possible ways, depending on their size, shape and density; suspension, saltation or creep.
Suspension is only possible for particles less than 0.
In a dust storm, these fine particles are lifted up and wafted aloft to heights of up to 6 km (3.
They reduce visibility and can remain in the atmosphere for days on end, conveyed by the trade winds for distances of up to 6,000 km (3,700 mi).
Denser clouds of dust can be formed in stronger winds, moving across the land with a billowing leading edge.
The sunlight can be obliterated and it may become as dark as night at ground level.
In a study of a dust storm in China in 2001, it was estimated that 6.
The mean particle size was 1.
A much smaller scale, short-lived phenomenon can occur in calm conditions when hot air near the ground rises quickly through a small pocket of cooler, low-pressure air above forming a whirling column of particles, a dust devil.
Sandstorms occur with much less frequency than dust storms.
They are often preceded by severe dust storms and occur when the wind velocity increases to a point where it can lift heavier particles.
These grains of sand, up to about 0.
Their weight prevents them from being airborne for long and most only travel a distance of a few meters (yards).
The sand streams along above the surface of the ground like a fluid, often rising to heights of about 30 cm (12 in).
In a really severe steady blow, 2 m (6 ft 7 in) is about as high as the sand stream can rise as the largest sand grains do not become airborne at all.
They are transported by creep, being rolled along the desert floor or performing short jumps.
During a sandstorm, the wind-blown sand particles become electrically charged.
Such electric fields, which range in size up to 80 kV/m, can produce sparks and cause interference with telecommunications equipment.
They are also unpleasant for humans and can cause headaches and nausea.
The electric fields are caused by the collision between airborne particles and by the impacts of saltating sand grains landing on the ground.
The mechanism is little understood but the particles usually have a negative charge when their diameter is under 250 μm and a positive one when they are over 500 μm.
Deserts and semi-deserts are home to ecosystems with low or very low biomass and primary productivity in arid or semi-arid climates.
They are mostly found in subtropical high-pressure belts and major continental rain shadows.
Primary productivity depends on low densities of small photoautotrophs that sustain a sparse trophic network.
Plant growth is limited by rainfall, temperature extremes and desiccating winds.
Deserts have strong temporal variability in the availability of resources due to the total amount of annual rainfall and the size of individual rainfall events.
Resources are often ephemeral or episodic, and this triggers sporadic animal movements and 'pulse and reserve' or 'boom-bust' ecosystem dynamics.
Erosion and sedimentation are high due to the sparse vegetation cover and the activities of large mammals and people.
Plants and animals in deserts are mostly adapted to extreme and prolonged water deficits, but their reproductive phenology often responds to short episodes of surplus.
Competitive interactions are weak.
Plants face severe challenges in arid environments.
Problems they need to solve include how to obtain enough water, how to avoid being eaten and how to reproduce.
Photosynthesis is the key to plant growth.
It can only take place during the day as energy from the sun is required, but during the day, many deserts become very hot.
Opening stomata to allow in the carbon dioxide necessary for the process causes evapotranspiration, and conservation of water is a top priority for desert vegetation.
Some plants have resolved this problem by adopting crassulacean acid metabolism, allowing them to open their stomata during the night to allow CO2 to enter, and close them during the day, or by using C4 carbon fixation.
Many desert plants have reduced the size of their leaves or abandoned them altogether.
Cacti are present in both North and South America with a post-Gondwana origin.
The genus is desert specialist, and in most species, the leaves have been dispensed with and the chlorophyll displaced into the trunks, the cellular structure of which has been modified to allow them to store water.
When rain falls, the water is rapidly absorbed by the shallow roots and retained to allow them to survive until the next downpour, which may be months or years away.
The giant saguaro cacti of the Sonoran Desert form "forests", providing shade for other plants and nesting places for desert birds.
Saguaro grows slowly but may live for up to two hundred years.
The surface of the trunk is folded like a concertina, allowing it to expand, and a large specimen can hold eight tons of water after a good downpour.
Other xerophytic plants have developed similar strategies by a process known as convergent evolution.
They limit water loss by reducing the size and number of stomata, by having waxy coatings and hairy or tiny leaves.
Some are deciduous, shedding their leaves in the driest season, and others curl their leaves up to reduce transpiration.
Others, such as aloes, store water in succulent leaves or stems or in fleshy tubers.
Desert plants maximize water uptake by having shallow roots that spread widely, or by developing long taproots that reach down to deep rock strata for ground water.
The saltbush in Australia has succulent leaves and secretes salt crystals, enabling it to live in saline areas.
In common with cacti, many have developed spines to ward off browsing animals.
Some desert plants produce seed which lies dormant in the soil until sparked into growth by rainfall.
With annuals, such plants grow with great rapidity and may flower and set seed within weeks, aiming to complete their development before the last vestige of water dries up.
For perennial plants, reproduction is more likely to be successful if the seed germinates in a shaded position, but not so close to the parent plant as to be in competition with it.
Some seed will not germinate until it has been blown about on the desert floor to scarify the seed coat.
The seed of the mesquite tree, which grows in deserts in the Americas, is hard and fails to sprout even when planted carefully.
When it has passed through the gut of a pronghorn it germinates readily, and the little pile of moist dung provides an excellent start to life well away from the parent tree.
The stems and leaves of some plants lower the surface velocity of sand-carrying winds and protect the ground from erosion.
Even small fungi and microscopic plant organisms found on the soil surface (so-called cryptobiotic soil) can be a vital link in preventing erosion and providing support for other living organisms.
Cold deserts often have high concentrations of salt in the soil.
Grasses and low shrubs are the dominant vegetation here and the ground may be covered with lichens.
Most shrubs have spiny leaves and shed them in the coldest part of the year.
Animals adapted to live in deserts are called xerocoles.
There is no evidence that body temperature of mammals and birds is adaptive to the different climates, either of great heat or cold.
In fact, with a very few exceptions, their basal metabolic rate is determined by body size, irrespective of the climate in which they live.
Many desert animals (and plants) show especially clear evolutionary adaptations for water conservation or heat tolerance and so are often studied in comparative physiology, ecophysiology, and evolutionary physiology.
One well-studied example is the specializations of mammalian kidneys shown by desert-inhabiting species.
Many examples of convergent evolution have been identified in desert organisms, including between cacti and Euphorbia, kangaroo rats and jerboas, Phrynosoma and Moloch lizards.
Deserts present a very challenging environment for animals.
Not only do they require food and water but they also need to keep their body temperature at a tolerable level.
In many ways, birds are the ablest to do this of the higher animals.
They can move to areas of greater food availability as the desert blooms after local rainfall and can fly to faraway waterholes.
In hot deserts, gliding birds can remove themselves from the over-heated desert floor by using thermals to soar in the cooler air at great heights.
In order to conserve energy, other desert birds run rather than fly.
The cream-coloured courser flits gracefully across the ground on its long legs, stopping periodically to snatch up insects.
Like other desert birds, it is well-camouflaged by its colour and can merge into the landscape when stationary.
The sandgrouse is an expert at this and nests on the open desert floor dozens of kilometers (miles) away from the waterhole it needs to visit daily.
Some small diurnal birds are found in very restricted localities where their plumage matches the color of the underlying surface.
The desert lark takes frequent dust baths which ensures that it matches its environment.
Water and carbon dioxide are metabolic end products of oxidation of fats, proteins, and carbohydrates.
Oxidising a gram of carbohydrate produces 0.
The kangaroo rat for example makes use of this water of metabolism and conserves water both by having a low basal metabolic rate and by remaining underground during the heat of the day, reducing loss of water through its skin and respiratory system when at rest.
Herbivorous mammals obtain moisture from the plants they eat.
Species such as the addax antelope, dik-dik, Grant's gazelle and oryx are so efficient at doing this that they apparently never need to drink.
The camel is a superb example of a mammal adapted to desert life.
It minimizes its water loss by producing concentrated urine and dry dung, and is able to lose 40% of its body weight through water loss without dying of dehydration.
Carnivores can obtain much of their water needs from the body fluids of their prey.
Many other hot desert animals are nocturnal, seeking out shade during the day or dwelling underground in burrows.
At depths of more than 50 cm (20 in), these remain at between 30 and 32 °C (86 and 90 °F) regardless of the external temperature.
Jerboas, desert rats, kangaroo rats and other small rodents emerge from their burrows at night and so do the foxes, coyotes, jackals and snakes that prey on them.
Kangaroos keep cool by increasing their respiration rate, panting, sweating and moistening the skin of their forelegs with saliva.
Mammals living in cold deserts have developed greater insulation through warmer body fur and insulating layers of fat beneath the skin.
The arctic weasel has a metabolic rate that is two or three times as high as would be expected for an animal of its size.
Birds have avoided the problem of losing heat through their feet by not attempting to maintain them at the same temperature as the rest of their bodies, a form of adaptive insulation.
The emperor penguin has dense plumage, a downy under layer, an air insulation layer next to the skin and various thermoregulatory strategies to maintain its body temperature in one of the harshest environments on Earth.
Being ectotherms, reptiles are unable to live in cold deserts but are well-suited to hot ones.
In the heat of the day in the Sahara, the temperature can rise to 50 °C (122 °F).
Reptiles cannot survive at this temperature and lizards will be prostrated by heat at 45 °C (113 °F).
They have few adaptations to desert life and are unable to cool themselves by sweating so they shelter during the heat of the day.
In the first part of the night, as the ground radiates the heat absorbed during the day, they emerge and search for prey.
Lizards and snakes are the most numerous in arid regions and certain snakes have developed a novel method of locomotion that enables them to move sidewards and navigate high sand-dunes.
These include the horned viper of Africa and the sidewinder of North America, evolutionarily distinct but with similar behavioural patterns because of convergent evolution.
Many desert reptiles are ambush predators and often bury themselves in the sand, waiting for prey to come within range.
Amphibians might seem unlikely desert-dwellers, because of their need to keep their skins moist and their dependence on water for reproductive purposes.
In fact, the few species that are found in this habitat have made some remarkable adaptations.
Most of them are fossorial, spending the hot dry months aestivating in deep burrows.
While there they shed their skins a number of times and retain the remnants around them as a waterproof cocoon to retain moisture.
In the Sonoran Desert, Couch's spadefoot toad spends most of the year dormant in its burrow.
Heavy rain is the trigger for emergence and the first male to find a suitable pool calls to attract others.
Eggs are laid and the tadpoles grow rapidly as they must reach metamorphosis before the water evaporates.
As the desert dries out, the adult toads rebury themselves.
The juveniles stay on the surface for a while, feeding and growing, but soon dig themselves burrows.
Few make it to adulthood.
The water holding frog in Australia has a similar life cycle and may aestivate for as long as five years if no rain falls.
The Desert rain frog of Namibia is nocturnal and survives because of the damp sea fogs that roll in from the Atlantic.
Invertebrates, particularly arthropods, have successfully made their homes in the desert.
Flies, beetles, ants, termites, locusts, millipedes, scorpions and spiders have hard cuticles which are impervious to water and many of them lay their eggs underground and their young develop away from the temperature extremes at the surface.
The Saharan silver ant (Cataglyphis bombycina) uses a heat shock protein in a novel way and forages in the open during brief forays in the heat of the day.
The long-legged darkling beetle in Namibia stands on its front legs and raises its carapace to catch the morning mist as condensate, funnelling the water into its mouth.
Some arthropods make use of the ephemeral pools that form after rain and complete their life cycle in a matter of days.
The desert shrimp does this, appearing "miraculously" in new-formed puddles as the dormant eggs hatch.
Others, such as brine shrimps, fairy shrimps and tadpole shrimps, are cryptobiotic and can lose up to 92% of their bodyweight, rehydrating as soon as it rains and their temporary pools reappear.
Humans have long made use of deserts as places to live, and more recently have started to exploit them for minerals and energy capture.
Deserts play a significant role in human culture with an extensive literature.
Deserts can only support a limited population of both humans and animals.
People have been living in deserts for millennia.
Many, such as the Bushmen in the Kalahari, the Aborigines in Australia and various tribes of North American Indians, were originally hunter-gatherers.
They developed skills in the manufacture and use of weapons, animal tracking, finding water, foraging for edible plants and using the things they found in their natural environment to supply their everyday needs.
Their self-sufficient skills and knowledge were passed down through the generations by word of mouth.
Other cultures developed a nomadic way of life as herders of sheep, goats, cattle, camels, yaks, llamas or reindeer.
They travelled over large areas with their herds, moving to new pastures as seasonal and erratic rainfall encouraged new plant growth.
They took with them their tents made of cloth or skins draped over poles and their diet included milk, blood and sometimes meat.
The desert nomads were also traders.
The Sahara is a very large expanse of land stretching from the Atlantic rim to Egypt.
Trade routes were developed linking the Sahel in the south with the fertile Mediterranean region to the north and large numbers of camels were used to carry valuable goods across the desert interior.
The Tuareg were traders and the transported goods traditionally included slaves, ivory and gold going northwards and salt going southwards.
Berbers with knowledge of the region were employed to guide the caravans between the various oases and wells.
Several million slaves may have been taken northwards across the Sahara between the 8th and 18th centuries.
Traditional means of overland transport declined with the advent of motor vehicles, shipping and air freight, but caravans still travel along routes between Agadez and Bilma and between Timbuktu and Taoudenni carrying salt from the interior to desert-edge communities.
Round the rims of deserts, where more precipitation occurred and conditions were more suitable, some groups took to cultivating crops.
This may have happened when drought caused the death of herd animals, forcing herdsmen to turn to cultivation.
With few inputs, they were at the mercy of the weather and may have lived at bare subsistence level.
The land they cultivated reduced the area available to nomadic herders, causing disputes over land.
The semi-arid fringes of the desert have fragile soils which are at risk of erosion when exposed, as happened in the American Dust Bowl in the 1930s.
The grasses that held the soil in place were ploughed under, and a series of dry years caused crop failures, while enormous dust storms blew the topsoil away.
Half a million Americans were forced to leave their land in this catastrophe.
Similar damage is being done today to the semi-arid areas that rim deserts and about twelve million hectares of land are being turned to desert each year.
Desertification is caused by such factors as drought, climatic shifts, tillage for agriculture, overgrazing and deforestation.
Vegetation plays a major role in determining the composition of the soil.
In many environments, the rate of erosion and run off increases dramatically with reduced vegetation cover.
Deserts contain substantial mineral resources, sometimes over their entire surface, giving them their characteristic colors.
For example, the red of many sand deserts comes from laterite minerals.
Geological processes in a desert climate can concentrate minerals into valuable deposits.
Leaching by ground water can extract ore minerals and redeposit them, according to the water table, in concentrated form.
Similarly, evaporation tends to concentrate minerals in desert lakes, creating dry lake beds or playas rich in minerals.
Evaporation can concentrate minerals as a variety of evaporite deposits, including gypsum, sodium nitrate, sodium chloride and borates.
Evaporites are found in the US's Great Basin Desert, historically exploited by the "20-mule teams" pulling carts of borax from Death Valley to the nearest railway.
A desert especially rich in mineral salts is the Atacama Desert, Chile, where sodium nitrate has been mined for explosives and fertilizer since around 1850.
Other desert minerals are copper from Chile, Peru, and Iran, and iron and uranium in Australia.
Many other metals, salts and commercially valuable types of rock such as pumice are extracted from deserts around the world.
Oil and gas form on the bottom of shallow seas when micro-organisms decompose under anoxic conditions and later become covered with sediment.
Many deserts were at one time the sites of shallow seas and others have had underlying hydrocarbon deposits transported to them by the movement of tectonic plates.
Some major oilfields such as Ghawar are found under the sands of Saudi Arabia.
Geologists believe that other oil deposits were formed by aeolian processes in ancient deserts as may be the case with some of the major American oil fields.
Traditional desert farming systems have long been established in North Africa, irrigation being the key to success in an area where water stress is a limiting factor to growth.
Techniques that can be used include drip irrigation, the use of organic residues or animal manures as fertilisers and other traditional agricultural management practices.
Once fertility has been built up, further crop production preserves the soil from destruction by wind and other forms of erosion.
It has been found that plant growth-promoting bacteria play a role in increasing the resistance of plants to stress conditions and these rhizobacterial suspensions could be inoculated into the soil in the vicinity of the plants.
A study of these microbes found that desert farming hampers desertification by establishing islands of fertility allowing farmers to achieve increased yields despite the adverse environmental conditions.
A field trial in the Sonoran Desert which exposed the roots of different species of tree to rhizobacteria and the nitrogen fixing bacterium Azospirillum brasilense with the aim of restoring degraded lands was only partially successful.
The Judean Desert was farmed in the 7th century BC during the Iron Age to supply food for desert forts.
Native Americans in the south western United States became agriculturalists around 600 AD when seeds and technologies became available from Mexico.
They used terracing techniques and grew gardens beside seeps, in moist areas at the foot of dunes, near streams providing flood irrigation and in areas irrigated by extensive specially built canals.
The Hohokam tribe constructed over 500 miles (800 km) of large canals and maintained them for centuries, an impressive feat of engineering.
They grew maize, beans, squash and peppers.
A modern example of desert farming is the Imperial Valley in California, which has high temperatures and average rainfall of just 3 in (76 mm) per year.
The economy is heavily based on agriculture and the land is irrigated through a network of canals and pipelines sourced entirely from the Colorado River via the All-American Canal.
The soil is deep and fertile, being part of the river's flood plains, and what would otherwise have been desert has been transformed into one of the most productive farming regions in California.
Other water from the river is piped to urban communities but all this has been at the expense of the river, which below the extraction sites no longer has any above-ground flow during most of the year.
Another problem of growing crops in this way is the build-up of salinity in the soil caused by the evaporation of river water.
The greening of the desert remains an aspiration and was at one time viewed as a future means for increasing food production for the world's growing population.
This prospect has proved false as it disregarded the environmental damage caused elsewhere by the diversion of water for desert project irrigation.
Deserts are increasingly seen as sources for solar energy, partly due to low amounts of cloud cover.
Many solar power plants have been built in the Mojave Desert such as the Solar Energy Generating Systems and Ivanpah Solar Power Facility.
Large swaths of this desert are covered in mirrors.
The potential for generating solar energy from the Sahara Desert is huge, the highest found on the globe.
Professor David Faiman of Ben-Gurion University has stated that the technology now exists to supply all of the world's electricity needs from 10% of the Sahara Desert.
Desertec Industrial Initiative was a consortium seeking $560 billion to invest in North African solar and wind installations over the next forty years to supply electricity to Europe via cable lines running under the Mediterranean Sea.
European interest in the Sahara Desert stems from its two aspects: the almost continual daytime sunshine and plenty of unused land.
The Sahara receives more sunshine per acre than any part of Europe.
The Sahara Desert also has the empty space totalling hundreds of square miles required to house fields of mirrors for solar plants.
The Negev Desert, Israel, and the surrounding area, including the Arava Valley, receive plenty of sunshine and are generally not arable.
This has resulted in the construction of many solar plants.
David Faiman has proposed that "giant" solar plants in the Negev could supply all of Israel's needs for electricity.
The Arabs were probably the first organized force to conduct successful battles in the desert.
By knowing back routes and the locations of oases and by utilizing camels, Muslim Arab forces were able to successfully overcome both Roman and Persian forces in the period 600 to 700 AD during the expansion of the Islamic caliphate.
Many centuries later, both world wars saw fighting in the desert.
In the First World War, the Ottoman Turks were engaged with the British regular army in a campaign that spanned the Arabian Peninsula.
The Turks were defeated by the British, who had the backing of irregular Arab forces that were seeking to revolt against the Turks in the Hejaz, made famous in T.
Lawrence's book Seven Pillars of Wisdom.
In the Second World War, the Western Desert Campaign began in Italian Libya.
Warfare in the desert offered great scope for tacticians to use the large open spaces without the distractions of casualties among civilian populations.
Tanks and armoured vehicles were able to travel large distances unimpeded and land mines were laid in large numbers.
However, the size and harshness of the terrain meant that all supplies needed to be brought in from great distances.
The victors in a battle would advance and their supply chain would necessarily become longer, while the defeated army could retreat, regroup and resupply.
For these reasons, the front line moved back and forth through hundreds of kilometers as each side lost and regained momentum.
Its most easterly point was at El Alamein in Egypt, where the Allies decisively defeated the Axis forces in 1942.
The desert is generally thought of as a barren and empty landscape.
It has been portrayed by writers, film-makers, philosophers, artists and critics as a place of extremes, a metaphor for anything from death, war or religion to the primitive past or the desolate future.
There is an extensive literature on the subject of deserts.
An early historical account is that of Marco Polo (c.
Some accounts give vivid descriptions of desert conditions, though often accounts of journeys across deserts are interwoven with reflection, as is the case in Charles Montagu Doughty's major work, Travels in Arabia Deserta (1888).
Antoine de Saint-Exupéry described both his flying and the desert in Wind, Sand and Stars, and Gertrude Bell travelled extensively in the Arabian desert in the early part of the 20th century, becoming an expert on the subject, writing books and advising the British government on dealing with the Arabs.
Another woman explorer was Freya Stark, who travelled alone in the Middle East, visiting Turkey, Arabia, Yemen, Syria, Persia and Afghanistan, writing over twenty books on her experiences.
The German naturalist Uwe George spent several years living in deserts, recording his experiences and research in his 1976 book, In the Deserts of this Earth.
The American poet Robert Frost expressed his bleak thoughts in his poem, Desert Places (1933), which ends with the stanza "They cannot scare me with their empty spaces / Between stars – on stars where no human race is.
Saints associated with the desert include Anthony the Great, also known as "Anthony of the Desert".
Pope Benedict XVI linked the metaphorical existence of "internal deserts" with physical and social deserts in his homily inaugurating his papacy: "The external deserts in the world are growing, because the internal deserts have become so vast".
Mars, Venus, and Titan are some planetary mass objects in the Solar System in which self-sustaining deserts are present.
Despite its low surface atmospheric pressure (only 1/100 of that of Earth), the patterns of atmospheric circulation on Mars have formed a sea of circumpolar sand more than 5 million km2 (1.
The Martian deserts consist of half-moon dunes in flat areas near the permanent polar ice caps in the north.
The smaller dune fields occupy the bottom of many of the craters situated in the Martian polar regions.
Examination of the surface of rocks by laser beamed from the Mars Exploration Rover appears to show a surface film that resembles the desert varnish found on Earth although it might just be surface dust.
The surface of Titan, a moon of Saturn, also has a desert-like surface with dune seas.
Venus has a surface air pressure of approximately 90 times that of Earth's atmosphere and a temperature of over 730 Kelvin, more than twice the temperature on Earth, and its surface does not have any liquid bodies nor does its surface receive much precipitation.
Macmahon, James (1988).
National Audubon Society nature guides.
Random House / Chanticleer Press.
ISBN 978-0-394-73139-1.
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP).
Archived from the original on 2006-06-16.
Map with biodiversity scenarios for desert areas, from the Global Deserts Outlook Archived 2018-07-14 at the Wayback Machine.
A forest is an ecosystem characterized by a dense community of trees.
Hundreds of definitions of forest are used throughout the world, incorporating factors such as tree density, tree height, land use, legal standing, and ecological function.
The United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) defines a forest as, "Land spanning more than 0.
It does not include land that is predominantly under agricultural or urban use.
Forests are the largest terrestrial ecosystems of Earth by area, and are found around the globe.
The next largest share of forests are found in subarctic climates, followed by temperate, and subtropical zones.
Forests account for 75% of the gross primary production of the Earth's biosphere, and contain 80% of the Earth's plant biomass.
Net primary production is estimated at 21.
Forests form distinctly different biomes at different latitudes and elevations, and with different precipitation and evapotranspiration rates.
These biomes include boreal forests in subarctic climates, tropical moist forests and tropical dry forests around the Equator, and temperate forests at the middle latitudes.
Forests form in areas of the Earth with high rainfall, while drier conditions produce a transition to savanna.
However, in areas with intermediate rainfall levels, forest transitions to savanna rapidly when the percentage of land that is covered by trees drops below 40 to 45 percent.
Research conducted in the Amazon rainforest shows that trees can alter rainfall rates across a region, releasing water from their leaves in anticipation of seasonal rains to trigger the wet season early.
Because of this, seasonal rainfall in the Amazon begins two to three months earlier than the climate would otherwise allow.
Deforestation in the Amazon and anthropogenic climate change hold the potential to interfere with this process, causing the forest to pass a threshold where it transitions into savanna.
Deforestation threatens many forest ecosystems.
Deforestation occurs when humans remove trees from a forested area by cutting or burning, either to harvest timber or to make way for farming.
Most deforestation today occurs in tropical forests.
The vast majority of this deforestation is because of the production of four commodities: wood, beef, soy, and palm oil.
Over the past 2,000 years, the area of land covered by forest in Europe has been reduced from 80% to 34%.
Large areas of forest have also been cleared in China and in the eastern United States, in which only 0.
Almost half of Earth's forest area (49 percent) is relatively intact, while 9 percent is found in fragments with little or no connectivity.
Tropical rainforests and boreal coniferous forests are the least fragmented, whereas subtropical dry forests and temperate oceanic forests are among the most fragmented.
Roughly 80 percent of the world's forest area is found in patches larger than 1 million hectares (2.
The remaining 20 percent is located in more than 34 million patches around the world – the vast majority less than 1,000 hectares (2,500 acres) in size.
Human society and forests can affect one another positively or negatively.
Forests provide ecosystem services to humans and serve as tourist attractions.
Forests can also affect people's health.
Human activities, including unsustainable use of forest resources, can negatively affect forest ecosystems.
Although the word forest is commonly used, there is no universally recognised precise definition, with more than 800 definitions of forest used around the world.
Although a forest is usually defined by the presence of trees, under many definitions an area completely lacking trees may still be considered a forest if it grew trees in the past, will grow trees in the future, or was legally designated as a forest regardless of vegetation type.
There are three broad categories of definitions of forest in use: administrative, land use, and land cover.
Administrative definitions are legal designations, and may not reflect the type of vegetation that grows upon the land; an area can be legally designated "forest" even if no trees grow on it.
Land-use definitions are based on the primary purpose the land is used for.
Under a land-use definition, any area used primarily for harvesting timber, including areas that have been cleared by harvesting, disease, fire, or for the construction of roads and infrastructure, are still defined as forests, even if they contain no trees.
Land-cover definitions define forests based upon the density of trees, area of tree canopy cover, or area of the land occupied by the cross-section of tree trunks (basal area) meeting a particular threshold.
This type of definition depends upon the presence of trees sufficient to meet the threshold, or at least of immature trees that are expected to meet the threshold once they mature.
Under land-cover definitions, there is considerable variation on where the cutoff points are between a forest, woodland, and savanna.
Under some definitions, to be considered a forest requires very high levels of tree canopy cover, from 60% to 100%, which excludes woodlands and savannas, which have a lower canopy cover.
Other definitions consider savannas to be a type of forest, and include all areas with tree canopies over 10%.
Some areas covered with trees are legally defined as agricultural areas, for example Norway spruce plantations, under Austrian forest law, when the trees are being grown as Christmas trees and are below a certain height.
The word forest derives from the Old French forest (also forès), denoting "forest, vast expanse covered by trees"; forest was first introduced into English as the word denoting wild land set aside for hunting without necessarily having trees on the land.
Possibly a borrowing, probably via Frankish or Old High German, of the Medieval Latin foresta, denoting "open wood", Carolingian scribes first used foresta in the capitularies of Charlemagne, specifically to denote the royal hunting grounds of the king.
The word was not endemic to the Romance languages, e.
Cognates of forest in Romance languages—e.
The precise origin of Medieval Latin foresta is obscure.
Some authorities claim the word derives from the Late Latin phrase forestam silvam, denoting "the outer wood"; others claim the word is a Latinisation of the Frankish *forhist, denoting "forest, wooded country", and was assimilated to forestam silvam, pursuant to the common practice of Frankish scribes.
The Old High German forst denoting "forest"; Middle Low German vorst denoting "forest"; Old English fyrhþ denoting "forest, woodland, game preserve, hunting ground" (English frith); and Old Norse fýri, denoting "coniferous forest"; all of which derive from the Proto-Germanic *furhísa-, *furhíþija-, denoting "a fir-wood, coniferous forest", from the Proto-Indo-European *perkwu-, denoting "a coniferous or mountain forest, wooded height" all attest to the Frankish *forhist.
Uses of forest in English to denote any uninhabited and unenclosed area are presently considered archaic.
The Norman rulers of England introduced the word as a legal term, as seen in Latin texts such as Magna Carta, to denote uncultivated land that was legally designated for hunting by feudal nobility (see royal forest).
These hunting forests did not necessarily contain any trees.
Because that often included significant areas of woodland, "forest" eventually came to connote woodland in general, regardless of tree density.
By the beginning of the fourteenth century, English texts used the word in all three of its senses: common, legal, and archaic.
Other English words used to denote "an area with a high density of trees" are firth, frith, holt, weald, wold, wood, and woodland.
Unlike forest, these are all derived from Old English and were not borrowed from another language.
Some present classifications reserve woodland for denoting a locale with more open space between trees, and distinguish kinds of woodlands as open forests and closed forests, premised on their crown covers.
Finally, sylva (plural sylvae or, less classically, sylvas) is a peculiar English spelling of the Latin silva, denoting a "woodland", and has precedent in English, including its plural forms.
While its use as a synonym of forest, and as a Latinate word denoting a woodland, may be admitted; in a specific technical sense it is restricted to denoting the species of trees that comprise the woodlands of a region, as in its sense in the subject of silviculture.
The resorting to sylva in English indicates more precisely the denotation that the use of forest intends.
The first known forests on Earth arose in the Middle Devonian (approximately 390 million years ago), with the evolution of cladoxylopsid plants like Calamophyton.
Appeared in the Late Devonian, Archaeopteris was both tree-like and fern-like plant, growing to 20 metres (66 ft) in height or more.
It quickly spread throughout the world, from the equator to subpolar latitudes.
It is the first species known to cast shade due to its fronds and forming soil from its roots.
Archaeopteris was deciduous, dropping its fronds onto the forest floor, the shade, soil, and forest duff from the dropped fronds creating the early forest.
The shed organic matter altered the freshwater environment, slowing its flow and providing food.
This promoted freshwater fish.
Forests account for 75% of the gross primary productivity of the Earth's biosphere, and contain 80% of the Earth's plant biomass.
Biomass per unit area is high compared to other vegetation communities.
Much of this biomass occurs below ground in the root systems and as partially decomposed plant detritus.
The woody component of a forest contains lignin, which is relatively slow to decompose compared with other organic materials such as cellulose or carbohydrate.
The world's forests contain about 606 gigatonnes of living biomass (above- and below-ground) and 59 gigatonnes of dead wood.
The total biomass has decreased slightly since 1990, but biomass per unit area has increased.
Global forest biomass in 2025 is estimated at 709 gigatonnes, which is an average of 171 tonnes per ha.
The forest carbon stock, including all carbon pools, is estimated at 714 gigatonnes, or 172 tonnes per ha.
Forest ecosystems broadly differ based on climate; latitudes 10° north and south of the equator are mostly covered in tropical rainforest, and the latitudes between 53°N and 67°N have boreal forest.
As a general rule, forests dominated by angiosperms (broadleaf forests) are more species-rich than those dominated by gymnosperms (conifer, montane, or needleleaf forests), although exceptions exist.
The trees that form the principal structural and defining component of a forest may be of a great variety of species (as in tropical rainforests and temperate deciduous forests), or relatively few species over large areas (e.
The biodiversity of forests also encompasses shrubs, herbaceous plants, mosses, ferns, lichens, fungi, and a variety of animals.
Trees rising up to 35 meters (115 ft) in height add a vertical dimension to the area of land that can support plant and animal species, opening up numerous ecological niches for arboreal animal species, epiphytes, and various species that thrive under the regulated microclimate created under the canopy.
Forests have intricate three-dimensional structures that increase in complexity with lower levels of disturbance and greater variety of tree species.
The biodiversity of forests varies considerably according to factors such as forest type, geography, climate, and soils – in addition to human use.
Most forest habitats in temperate regions support relatively few animal and plant species, and species that tend to have large geographical distributions, while the montane forests of Africa, South America, Southeast Asia, and lowland forests of Australia, coastal Brazil, the Caribbean islands, Central America, and insular Southeast Asia have many species with small geographical distributions.
Areas with dense human populations and intense agricultural land use, such as Europe, parts of Bangladesh, China, India, and North America, are less intact in terms of their biodiversity.
Northern Africa, southern Australia, coastal Brazil, Madagascar, and South Africa are also identified as areas with striking losses in biodiversity intactness.
A forest consists of many components that can be broadly divided into two categories: biotic (living) and abiotic (non-living).
The living parts include trees, shrubs, vines, grasses and other herbaceous (non-woody) plants, mosses, algae, fungi, insects, mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and microorganisms living on the plants and animals and in the soil, connected by mycorrhizal networks.
The main layers of all forest types are the forest floor, the understory, and the canopy.
The emergent layer, above the canopy, exists in tropical rainforests.
Each layer has a different set of plants and animals, depending upon the availability of sunlight, moisture, and food.
The Forest floor is covered in dead plant material such as fallen leaves and decomposing logs, which detritivores break down into new soil.
The layer of decaying leaves that covers the soil is necessary for many insects to overwinter and for amphibians, birds, and other animals to shelter and forage for food.
Leaf litter also keeps the soil moist, stops erosion, and protects roots against extreme heat and cold.
The fungal mycelium that helps form the mycorrhizal network transmits nutrients from decaying material to trees and other plants.
The forest floor supports a variety of plants, ferns, grasses, and tree seedlings, as well as animals such as ants, amphibians, spiders, and millipedes.
Understory is made up of bushes, shrubs, and young trees that are adapted to living in the shade of the canopy.
Canopy is formed by the mass of intertwined branches, twigs, and leaves of mature trees.
The crowns of the dominant trees receive most of the sunlight.
This is the most productive part of the trees, where maximum food is produced.
The canopy forms a shady, protective "umbrella" over the rest of the forest.
Emergent layer exists in a tropical rain forest and is composed of a few scattered trees that tower over the canopy.
In botany and countries like Germany and Poland, a different classification of forest vegetation is often used: tree, shrub, herb, and moss layers (see stratification (vegetation)).
Forests are classified differently and to different degrees of specificity.
One such classification is in terms of the biomes in which they exist, combined with leaf longevity of the dominant species (whether they are evergreen or deciduous).
Another distinction is whether the forests are composed predominantly of broadleaf trees, coniferous (needle-leaved) trees, or mixed.
Boreal forests occupy the subarctic zone and are generally evergreen and coniferous.
Temperate zones support both broadleaf deciduous forests (e.
Warm temperate zones support broadleaf evergreen forests, including laurel forests.
Tropical and subtropical forests include tropical and subtropical moist forests, tropical and subtropical dry forests, and tropical and subtropical coniferous forests.
Forests are classified according to physiognomy based on their overall physical structure or developmental stage (e.
Forests can also be classified more specifically based on the climate and the dominant tree species present, resulting in numerous different forest types (e.
The number of trees in the world, according to a 2015 estimate, is 3 trillion, of which 1.
The 2015 estimate is about eight times higher than previous estimates, and is based on tree densities measured on over 400,000 plots.
It remains subject to a wide margin of error, not least because the samples are mainly from Europe and North America.
Forests can also be classified according to the amount of human alteration.
Old-growth forest contains mainly natural patterns of biodiversity in established seral patterns, and they contain mainly species native to the region and habitat.
In contrast, secondary forest is forest regrowing following timber harvest and may contain species originally from other regions or habitats.
Different global forest classification systems have been proposed, but none has gained universal acceptance.
UNEP-WCMC's forest category classification system is a simplification of other, more complex systems (e.
UNESCO's forest and woodland 'subformations').
This system divides the world's forests into 26 major types, which reflect climatic zones as well as the principal types of trees.
These 26 major types can be reclassified into 6 broader categories: temperate needleleaf, temperate broadleaf and mixed, tropical moist, tropical dry, sparse trees and parkland, and forest plantations.
Each category is described in a separate section below.
Temperate needleleaf forests mostly occupy the higher latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere, as well as some warm temperate areas, especially on nutrient-poor or otherwise unfavourable soils.
These forests are composed entirely, or nearly so, of coniferous species (Coniferophyta).
In the Northern Hemisphere, pines Pinus, spruces Picea, larches Larix, firs Abies, Douglas firs Pseudotsuga, and hemlocks Tsuga make up the canopy; but other taxa are also important.
In the Southern Hemisphere, most coniferous trees (members of Araucariaceae and Podocarpaceae) occur mixed with broadleaf species, and are classed as broadleaf-and-mixed forests.
Temperate broadleaf and mixed forests include a substantial component of trees of the Anthophyta group.
They are generally characteristic of the warmer temperate latitudes, but extend to cool temperate ones, particularly in the southern hemisphere.
They include such forest types as the mixed deciduous forests of the United States and their counterparts in China and Japan; the broadleaf evergreen rainforests of Japan, Chile, and Tasmania; the sclerophyllous forests of Australia, central Chile, the Mediterranean, and California; and the southern beech Nothofagus forests of Chile and New Zealand.
There are many different types of tropical moist forests, with lowland evergreen broad-leaf tropical rainforests: for example várzea and igapó forests and the terra firme forests of the Amazon Basin; the peat swamp forests; dipterocarp forests of Southeast Asia; and the high forests of the Congo Basin.
Seasonal tropical forests, perhaps the best description for the colloquial term "jungle", typically range from the rainforest zone 10 degrees north or south of the equator, to the Tropic of Cancer and Tropic of Capricorn.
Forests located on mountains are also included in this category, divided largely into upper and lower montane formations, on the basis of the variation of physiognomy corresponding to changes in altitude.
Tropical dry forests are characteristic of areas in the tropics affected by seasonal drought.
The seasonality of rainfall is usually reflected in the deciduousness of the forest canopy, with most trees being leafless for several months of the year.
Under some conditions, such as less fertile soils or less predictable drought regimes, the proportion of evergreen species increases and the forests are characterised as "sclerophyllous".
Thorn forest, a dense forest of low stature with a high frequency of thorny or spiny species, is found where drought is prolonged, and especially where grazing animals are plentiful.
On very poor soils, and especially where fire or herbivory are recurrent phenomena, savannas develop.
Sparse trees and savanna are forests with sparse tree-canopy cover.
They occur principally in areas of transition from forested to non-forested landscapes.
The two major zones in which these ecosystems occur are in the boreal region and in the seasonally dry tropics.
At high latitudes, north of the main zone of boreal forestland, growing conditions are not adequate to maintain a continuously closed forest cover, so tree cover is both sparse and discontinuous.
This vegetation is variously called open taiga, open lichen woodland, and forest-tundra.
A savanna is a mixed woodland–grassland ecosystem characterized by the trees being sufficiently widely spaced so that the canopy does not close.
The open canopy allows sufficient light to reach the ground to support an unbroken herbaceous layer that consists primarily of grasses.
Savannas maintain an open canopy despite a high tree density.
Forest plantations are generally intended for the production of timber and pulpwood.
Commonly mono-specific, planted with even spacing between the trees, and intensively managed, these forests are generally important as habitat for native biodiversity.
Some are managed in ways that enhance their biodiversity protection functions and can provide ecosystem services such as nutrient capital maintenance, watershed and soil structure protection and carbon storage.
The annual net loss of forest area has decreased since 1990, but the world is not on track to meet the target of the United Nations Strategic Plan for Forests to increase forest area by 3 percent by 2030.
The world has a total forest area of 4.
The tropical domain has the largest proportion of the world’s forests (45%), followed by the boreal, temperate and subtropical domains.
Of the regions, Europe has the largest forest area, accounting for 25% of the world’s total.
South America has the highest proportion of forest, at 49% of the total land area.
More than half (54%) of the world’s forests is in only five countries (in descending order by area).
Seven countries and areas; the Falkland Islands, Gibraltar, Holy See, Monaco, Nauru, Svalbard and Jan Mayen Islands, and Tokelau reported having no forest at all, and forest accounts for less than 10% of the total land area in another 49 countries and areas.
In 2023, forest covered 94 percent of the land area in Suriname, 92 percent in the Federated States of Micronesia and 91 percent in Gabon.
While deforestation is taking place in some areas, new forests are being established through natural expansion or deliberate efforts in other areas.
As a result, the net loss of forest area is less than the rate of deforestation; and it, too, is decreasing: from 7.
In absolute terms, the global forest area decreased by 178 million hectares (440 million acres; 1,780,000 square kilometres; 690,000 square miles) between 1990 and 2020, which is an area about the size of Libya.
Converting carbon dioxide into oxygen and biomass.
A full-grown tree produces about 100 kilograms (220 lb) of net oxygen per year.
Acting as a carbon sink.
Therefore, they are necessary to mitigate climate change.
Aiding in regulating climate.
For example, research from 2017 shows that forests induce rainfall.
If the forest is cut, it can lead to drought, and in the tropics to occupational heat stress of outdoor workers.
Mitigating natural hazards such as floods.
Serving as a genetic reserve.
Serving as a source of lumber and as recreational areas.
Serving as a source of woodlands and trees for millions of people dependent almost entirely on forests for subsistence for their essential fuelwood, food, and fodder needs.
Some researchers state that forests do not only provide benefits, but can in certain cases also incur costs to humans.
Forests may impose an economic burden, diminish the enjoyment of natural areas, reduce the food-producing capacity of grazing land and cultivated land, reduce biodiversity, reduce available water for humans and wildlife, harbour dangerous or destructive wildlife, and act as reservoirs of human and livestock disease.
An important consideration regarding carbon sequestration is that forests can turn from a carbon sink to a carbon source if plant diversity, density or forest area decreases, as has been observed in different tropical forests The typical tropical forest may become a carbon source by the 2060s.
An assessment of European forests found early signs of carbon sink saturation, after decades of increasing strength.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) concluded that a combination of measures aimed at increasing forest carbon stocks, andsustainable timber offtake will generate the largest carbon sequestration benefit.
The term forest-dependent people is used to describe any of a wide variety of livelihoods that are dependent on access to forests, products harvested from forests, or ecosystem services provided by forests, including those of Indigenous peoples dependent on forests.
In India, approximately 22 percent of the population belongs to forest-dependent communities, which live in close proximity to forests and practice agroforestry as a principal part of their livelihood.
People of Ghana who rely on timber and bushmeat harvested from forests and Indigenous peoples of the Amazon rainforest are also examples of forest-dependent people.
Though forest-dependence by more common definitions is statistically associated with poverty and rural livelihoods, elements of forest-dependence exist in communities with a wide range of characteristics.
Generally, richer households derive more cash value from forest resources, whereas among poorer households, forest resources are more important for home consumption and increase community resilience.
Forests are fundamental to the culture and livelihood of indigenous people groups that live in and depend on forests, many of which have been removed from and denied access to the lands on which they lived as part of global colonialism.
Indigenous lands contain 36% or more of intact forest worldwide, host more biodiversity, and experience less deforestation.
Indigenous activists have argued that degradation of forests and indigenous peoples' marginalization and land dispossession are interconnected.
Other concerns among indigenous peoples include lack of Indigenous involvement in forest management and loss of knowledge related for the forest ecosystem.
Since 2002, the amount of land that is legally owned by or designated for indigenous peoples has broadly increased, but land acquisition in lower-income countries by multinational corporations, often with little or no consultation of indigenous peoples, has also increased.
Research in the Amazon rainforest suggests that indigenous methods of agroforestry form reservoirs of biodiversity.
Forest management has changed considerably over the last few centuries, with rapid changes from the 1980s onward, culminating in a practice now referred to as sustainable forest management.
Forest ecologists concentrate on forest patterns and processes, usually with the aim of elucidating cause-and-effect relationships.
Foresters who practice sustainable forest management focus on the integration of ecological, social, and economic values, often in consultation with local communities and other stakeholders.
Humans have generally decreased the amount of forest worldwide.
Anthropogenic factors that can affect forests include logging, urban sprawl, human-caused forest fires, acid rain, invasive species, and the slash and burn practices of swidden agriculture or shifting cultivation.
The loss and re-growth of forests lead to a distinction between two broad types of forest: primary or old-growth forest and secondary forest.
There are also many natural factors that can cause changes in forests over time, including forest fires, insects, diseases, weather, competition between species, etc.
In 1997, the World Resources Institute recorded that only 20% of the world's original forests remained in large intact tracts of undisturbed forest.
More than 75% of these intact forests lie in three countries: the boreal forests of Russia and Canada, and the rainforest of Brazil.
According to Food and Agriculture Organization's (FAO) Global Forest Resources Assessment 2020, an estimated 420 million hectares (1.
In the most recent five-year period (2015–2020), the annual rate of deforestation was estimated at 10 million hectares (25 million acres), down from 12 million hectares (30 million acres) annually in 2010–2015.
The transition of a region from forest loss to net gain in forested land is referred to as the forest transition.
This change occurs through a few main pathways, including increase in commercial tree plantations, adoption of agroforestry techniques by small farmers, or spontaneous regeneration when former agricultural land is abandoned.
It can be motivated by the economic benefits of forests, the ecosystem services forests provide, or cultural changes where people increasingly appreciate forests for their spiritual, aesthetic, or otherwise intrinsic value.
According to the Special Report on Global Warming of 1.
China instituted a ban on logging, beginning in 1998, due to the erosion and flooding that it caused.
In addition, ambitious tree-planting programmes in countries such as China, India, the United States, and Vietnam – combined with natural expansion of forests in some regions – have added more than 7 million hectares (17 million acres) of new forests annually.
As a result, the net loss of forest area was reduced to 5.
In 2015, a study for Nature Climate Change showed that the trend has recently been reversed, leading to an "overall gain" in global biomass and forests.
This gain is due especially to reforestation in China and Russia.
New forests are not equivalent to old growth forests in terms of species diversity, resilience, and carbon capture.
On 7 September 2015, the FAO released a new study stating that over the last 25 years the global deforestation rate has decreased by 50% due to improved management of forests and greater government protection.
In 2025 the area of forest in legally established protected areas worldwide was estimated at 813 million ha, which is around 20% of the total forest area.
Of the six regions, Asia has the largest share of forests in protected areas, at 26 %.
The area of forest in protected areas has increased by 251 million ha globally since 1990.
In 2020 there was an estimated 726 million hectares (1.
Of the six major world regions, South America was the highest share of forests in protected areas, at 31 percent.
The area of such areas globally had increased by 191 million hectares (470 million acres) since 1990, but the rate of annual increase slowed in 2010–2020.
Smaller areas of woodland in cities may be managed as urban forestry, sometimes within public parks.
These are often created for human benefits; Attention Restoration Theory argues that spending time in nature reduces stress and improves health, while forest schools and kindergartens help young people to develop social as well as scientific skills in forests.
These typically need to be close to where the children live.
Canada has about 4 million square kilometres (1.
More than 90% of forest land is publicly owned and about 50% of the total forest area is allocated for harvesting.
These allocated areas are managed using the principles of sustainable forest management, which include extensive consultation with local stakeholders.
About eight percent of Canada's forest is legally protected from resource development.
Much more forest land—about 40 percent of the total forest land base—is subject to varying degrees of protection through processes such as integrated land use planning or defined management areas, such as certified forests.
By December 2006, over 1.
Clearcutting, first used in the latter half of the 20th century, is less expensive, but devastating to the environment; and companies are required by law to ensure that harvested areas are adequately regenerated.
Most Canadian provinces have regulations limiting the size of new clear-cuts, although some older ones grew to 110 square kilometres (42 sq mi) over several years.
The Canadian Forest Service is the government department which looks after Forests in Canada.
Latvia's forests have been steadily increasing over the years, which is in contrast to many other nations, mostly due to the forestation of land not used for agriculture.
In 1935, there were only 1.
Birch is the most common tree at 28.
In the United States, most forests have historically been affected by humans to some degree, though in recent years improved forestry practices have helped regulate or moderate large-scale impacts.
The United States Forest Service estimated a net loss of about 2 million hectares (4.
In many areas of the United States, the area of forest is stable or increasing, particularly in many northern states.
The opposite problem from flooding has plagued national forests, with loggers complaining that a lack of thinning and proper forest management has resulted in large forest fires.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.
Text taken from Global Forest Resources Assessment 2020 Key findings​, FAO, FAO.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.
Text taken from The State of the World's Forests 2020.
In brief – Forests, biodiversity and people​, FAO & UNEP, FAO & UNEP.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY 4.
Text taken from Global Forest Resources Assessment 2025​, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY 4.
Text taken from World Food and Agriculture – Statistical Yearbook 2025​, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Luck Baker, Andrew (18 November 2008).
Conservation International.
Schlich, Wilhelm; Pinchot, Gifford (1911).
In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.
Encyclopædia Britannica.
Cambridge University Press.
Africa is the world's second-largest and second-most populous continent after Asia.
Based on 2024 projections, Africa's population will exceed 3.
Africa is the least wealthy inhabited continent per capita and second-least wealthy by total wealth, ahead of Oceania.
Scholars have attributed this to various factors including geography, climate, corruption, colonialism, the Cold War, and neocolonialism.
Despite this low concentration of wealth, the African economy is home to many of the world's fastest-growing economies.
Africa straddles the equator and the prime meridian.
The continent is surrounded by the Mediterranean Sea to the north, the Arabian Plate and the Gulf of Aqaba to the northeast, the Indian Ocean to the southeast and the Atlantic Ocean to the west.
France, Italy, Portugal, Spain, and Yemen have parts of their territories located on African geographical soil, mostly in the form of islands.
The continent includes Madagascar and various archipelagos.
It contains 54 fully recognised sovereign states, eight cities and islands that are part of non-African states, and two de facto independent states with limited or no recognition.
This count does not include Malta and Sicily, which are geologically part of the African continent.
Algeria is Africa's largest country by area, and Nigeria is its largest by population.
African nations cooperate through the establishment of the African Union, which is headquartered in Addis Ababa.
Africa is highly biodiverse; it is the continent with the largest number of megafauna species, as it was least affected by the extinction of the Pleistocene megafauna.
However, Africa is also heavily affected by a wide range of environmental issues, including desertification, deforestation, water scarcity, and pollution.
These entrenched environmental concerns are expected to worsen as climate change impacts Africa.
The UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has identified Africa as the continent most vulnerable to climate change.
The history of Africa is long, complex, and varied, and has often been under-appreciated by the global historical community.
In African societies the oral word is revered, and they have generally recorded their history via oral tradition, which has led anthropologists to term them "oral civilisations", contrasted with "literate civilisations" which pride the written word.
African culture is rich and diverse both within and between the continent's regions, encompassing art, cuisine, music and dance, religion, and dress.
Africa, particularly Eastern Africa, is widely accepted to be the place of origin of humans and the Hominidae clade, also known as the great apes.
The earliest hominids and their ancestors have been dated to around 7 million years ago, and Homo sapiens (modern human) are believed to have originated in Africa 350,000 to 260,000 years ago.
In the 4th and 3rd millennia BCE Ancient Egypt, Kerma, Punt, and the Tichitt Tradition emerged in North, East and West Africa, while from 3000 BCE to 500 CE the Bantu expansion swept from modern-day Cameroon through Central, East, and Southern Africa, displacing or absorbing groups such as the Khoisan and Pygmies.
Some African empires include Wagadu, Mali, Songhai, Sokoto, Ife, Benin, Asante, the Fatimids, Almoravids, Almohads, Ayyubids, Mamluks, Kongo, Mwene Muji, Luba, Lunda, Kitara, Aksum, Ethiopia, Adal, Ajuran, Kilwa, Sakalava, Imerina, Maravi, Mutapa, Rozvi, Mthwakazi, and Zulu.
Despite the predominance of states, many societies were heterarchical and stateless.
Slave trades created various diasporas, especially in the Americas.
From the late 19th century to early 20th century, driven by the Second Industrial Revolution, most of Africa was rapidly conquered and colonised by European nations, save for Ethiopia and Liberia.
European rule had significant impacts on Africa's societies, and colonies were maintained for the purpose of economic exploitation and extraction of natural resources.
Most present states emerged from a process of decolonisation following World War II, and established the Organisation of African Unity in 1963, the predecessor to the African Union.
The nascent countries decided to keep their colonial borders, with traditional power structures used in governance to varying degrees.
Afri was a Latin name used to refer to the inhabitants of what was then known as northern Africa, located west of the Nile river, and in its widest sense referring to all lands south of the Mediterranean, also known as Ancient Libya.
This name seems to have originally referred to a native Libyan tribe, an ancestor of modern Berbers; see Terence for discussion.
The name had usually been connected with the Phoenician word ʿafar meaning "dust", but a 1981 hypothesis has asserted that it stems from the Berber word ifri (plural ifran) meaning "cave", in reference to cave dwellers.
The same word may be found in the name of the Banu Ifran from Algeria and Tripolitania, a Berber tribe originally from Yafran (also known as Ifrane) in northwestern Libya, as well as the city of Ifrane in Morocco.
Under Roman rule, Carthage became the capital of the province then named Africa Proconsularis, following the Roman victory over the Carthaginians in the Third Punic War in 146 BC, which also included the coastal part of modern Libya.
The Latin suffix -ica can sometimes be used to denote a land (e.
The later Muslim region of Ifriqiya, following its conquest of the Byzantine (Eastern Roman) Empire's Exarchatus Africae, also preserved a form of the name.
According to the Romans, Africa lies to the west of Egypt, while "Asia" was used to refer to Anatolia and lands to the east.
A definite line was drawn between the two continents by the geographer Ptolemy (85–165 CE), indicating Alexandria along the Prime Meridian and making the isthmus of Suez and the Red Sea the boundary between Asia and Africa.
As Europeans came to understand the real extent of the continent, the idea of "Africa" expanded with their knowledge.
The 1st-century Jewish historian Flavius Josephus (Ant.
Isidore of Seville in his 7th-century Etymologiae XIV.
Massey, in 1881, stated that Africa is derived from the Egyptian af-rui-ka, meaning "to turn toward the opening of the Ka".
The Ka is the energetic double of every person and the "opening of the Ka" refers to a womb or birthplace.
Africa would be, for the Egyptians, "the birthplace".
Michèle Fruyt in 1976 proposed linking the Latin word with africus "south wind", which would be of Umbrian origin and mean originally "rainy wind".
Stieglitz of Rutgers University in 1984 proposed: "The name Africa, derived from the Latin *Aphir-ic-a, is cognate to Hebrew Ophir ['rich'].
Ibn Khallikan and some other historians claim that the name of Africa came from a Himyarite king called Afrikin ibn Kais ibn Saifi ("Afrikus son of Abraham") who subdued Ifriqiya.
Arabic afrīqā (feminine noun) and ifrīqiyā, now usually pronounced afrīqiyā (feminine) 'Africa', from 'afara [' = 'ain, not 'alif] 'to be dusty' from 'afar 'dust, powder' and 'afir 'dried, dried up by the sun, withered' and 'affara 'to dry in the sun on hot sand' or 'to sprinkle with dust'.
Possibly Phoenician faraqa in the sense of 'colony, separation'.
The terms "North Africa" and "Sub-Saharan Africa" has been subject to recent criticism from some scholars due to its historical root in colonialist discourse which arbitrarily separated Africa into a white "northern" Africa and black "southern" Africa, overlooking common genetic links and regional diversity across the continent.
In accordance with African cosmology, African historical consciousness viewed historical change and continuity, order and purpose within the framework of man and his environment, the gods, and his ancestors, and he believed himself part of a holistic spiritual entity.
In African societies, the historical process is largely a communal one, with eyewitness accounts, hearsay, reminiscences, and occasionally visions, dreams, and hallucinations crafted into narrative oral traditions which are performed and transmitted through generations.
In oral traditions time is sometimes mythical and social, and ancestors were considered historical actors.
Mind and memory shapes traditions, as events are condensed over time and crystallise into clichés.
Oral tradition can be exoteric or esoteric.
It speaks to people according to their understanding, unveiling itself in accordance with their aptitudes.
In African epistemology, the epistemic subject "experiences the epistemic object in a sensuous, emotive, intuitive, abstractive understanding, rather than through abstraction alone, as is the case in Western epistemology" to arrive at a "complete knowledge", and as such oral traditions, music, proverbs, and the like were used in the preservation and transmission of knowledge.
Africa is considered by most paleoanthropologists to be the oldest inhabited territory on Earth, with the Human species originating from the continent.
During the mid-20th century, anthropologists discovered many fossils and evidence of human occupation perhaps as early as seven million years ago ("Before Present"; BP).
Fossil remains of several species of early apelike humans thought to have evolved into modern humans, such as Australopithecus afarensis radiometrically dated to approximately 3.
After the evolution of Homo sapiens approximately 350,000 to 260,000 years BP in Africa, the continent was mainly populated by groups of hunter-gatherers.
These first modern humans left Africa and populated the rest of the globe during the Out of Africa II migration dated to approximately 50,000 years BP, exiting the continent either across Bab-el-Mandeb over the Red Sea, the Strait of Gibraltar in Morocco, or the Isthmus of Suez in Egypt.
Other migrations of modern humans within the African continent have been dated to that time, with evidence of early human settlement found in Southern Africa, Southeast Africa, North Africa, and the Sahara.
At the end of the Ice ages, estimated to have been around 10,500 BC, the Sahara had again become a green fertile valley, and its African populations returned from the interior and coastal highlands in Africa, with rock art paintings depicting a fertile Sahara and large populations discovered in Tassili n'Ajjer dating back perhaps 10 millennia.
However, the warming and drying climate meant that by 5,000 BC, the Sahara region was becoming increasingly dry and hostile.
Around 3500 BC, due to a tilt in the Earth's orbit, the Sahara experienced a period of rapid desertification.
The domestication of cattle in Africa preceded agriculture and seems to have existed alongside hunter-gatherer cultures.
It is speculated that by 6,000 BC, cattle were domesticated in North Africa.
In West Africa, a wet phase ushered in an expanding rainforest and wooded savanna from Senegal to Cameroon.
Between 9,000 and 5,000 BC, Niger–Congo speakers domesticated the oil palm and raffia palm.
Black-eyed peas and voandzeia (African groundnuts), were domesticated, followed by okra and kola nuts.
Since most of the plants grew in the forest, the Niger–Congo speakers invented polished stone axes for clearing forest.
Pygmies are thought to have inhabited Central Africa for many millennia, splitting into eastern and western groups around 5,000 BP.
Over 150,000 BP, there was an early dispersal of anatomically modern humans to Southern Africa, equated with the modern-day Khoisan who have preserved their traditional hunter-gatherer way of life.
From 3500 BC, nomes (ruled by nomarchs) coalesced to form the kingdoms of Lower Egypt and Upper Egypt in northeast Africa.
Around 3100 BC Upper Egypt conquered Lower Egypt to unify Egypt under the 1st dynasty, with the process of consolidation and assimilation completed by the time of the 3rd dynasty who formed the Old Kingdom of Egypt in 2686 BC.
The Kingdom of Kerma emerged around this time to become the dominant force in Nubia, controlling territory as large as Egypt between the 1st and 4th cataracts of the Nile.
The height of the Old Kingdom saw the construction of many great pyramids, though under the 6th dynasty power gradually decentralised to the nomarchs, culminating in the disintegration of the kingdom, exacerbated by drought and famine.
Around 2055 BC, the 11th dynasty, based in Thebes, conquered the others to form the Middle Kingdom of Egypt, and the 12th dynasty expanded into Lower Nubia at the expense of Kerma.
Around 1700 BC, the Middle Kingdom fractured in two, and the Hyksos (a militaristic people from Palestine) invaded and conquered Lower Egypt, while Kerma coordinated invasions deep into Egypt to reach its greatest extent.
In 1550 BC, the 18th dynasty expelled the Hyksos, and established the New Kingdom of Egypt.
The New Kingdom conquered the Levant from the Canaanites, Mittani, Amorites, and Hittites, and extinguished Kerma, incorporating Nubia into the empire, and sending the Egyptian empire into its golden age.
Internal struggles, drought, famine, and invasions by a confederation of seafaring peoples contributed to the New Kingdom's collapse in 1069 BC.
The New Kingdom's collapse liberated the Kingdom of Kush in Nubia, which manoeuvred into power in Upper Egypt and conquered Lower Egypt in 754 BC to form the Kushite Empire.
The Kushites ruled for a century and oversaw a revival in pyramid building, until they were driven out of Egypt by the Assyrians in 663 BC in reprisal for their expansion towards the Assyrian Empire.
The Assyrians installed a puppet dynasty that later gained independence and once more unified Egypt, until it was conquered by the Achaemenid Empire in 525 BC.
Egypt briefly regained independence from the Achaemenids under the 28th dynasty from 404 to 343 BC.
The conquest of Achaemenid Egypt by Alexander the Great in 332 BC marked the beginning of Hellenistic rule and the installation of the Macedonian Ptolemaic dynasty in Egypt.
The Ptolemaics lost their holdings outside of Africa to the Seleucids in the Syrian Wars, expanded into Cyrenaica, and briefly occupied part of Kush in the 3rd century BC.
In the 1st century BC, Ptolemaic Egypt became entangled in a Roman civil war, leading to its conquest by the Romans in 30 BC.
Kush persisted as a major regional power until, having been weakened from internal rebellion amid worsening climatic conditions, invasions by Aksum and the Noba caused their disintegration into Makuria, Alodia, and Nobatia around the 5th century AD.
In the Horn of Africa, there was the Land of Punt, a kingdom on the Red Sea which was a close trading partner of Ancient Egypt in the 3rd and 2nd millennia BC.
Rodolfo Fattovich equated it to the Gash Group in the Sudanese-Eritrean lowlands, and some scholars have hypothesised modern-day Somalia, while Kenneth Kitchen and Felix Chami locate it on Zanzibar Island.
In the Eritrean-Ethiopian Highlands, the kingdom of dʿmt rose c.
Several scholars consider there to have been other contemporaneous states, and dʿmt's collapse in the mid-1st century BC saw the region inhabited by small polities.
Modern-day Somalia was inhabited by nomadic pastoralists, and along the Horn's coast there were many ancient Somali city-states that thrived off of the wider Red Sea trade, and enjoyed a lucrative monopoly on cinnamon from Ancient India due to their freedom from Roman interference.
In the 1st century AD, the Kingdom of Aksum rose from a city-state to rule much of the northern Ethiopian-Eritrean Highlands and the Red Sea port of Adulis.
Aksum was described as one of the four great powers by Persian prophet Mani in the 3rd century.
Aksum's king converted from traditional religion to Christianity in the 4th century, gradually followed by the population.
In the 6th century, Aksum conquered South Arabia, though struggled to maintain control over it, and began to gradually lose its dominance over Red Sea trade to Persians and Arabs.
Northwest Africa (the Maghreb) was inhabited by Berber semi-nomadic pastoralists.
In the 1st millennium BC, Phoenician migration and settlement came in search for precious metals in the Gulf of Tunis.
This grew into Ancient Carthage after gaining independence from Phoenicia in the 6th century BC, and they built an extensive trading empire with a strict mercantile network.
Carthage's collapse and conquest by Rome in the Punic Wars (3rd and 2nd centuries BC) saw Numidia and Mauretania become major powers in the Maghreb.
Towards the end of the 2nd century BC Mauretania fought alongside Numidia's Jugurtha against the Romans in the Jugurthine War after he had usurped the Numidian throne from a Roman ally.
Together they inflicted heavy casualties, with the war only ending inconclusively when Mauretania's Bocchus I sold out Jugurtha to the Romans.
Around the turn of the millennium, both came under direct Roman rule.
While traditional religion predominated among Berbers, some people converted to Christianity.
In the 5th century AD the Vandals conquered Roman Africa before the fall of Rome, though the province was reconquered by the Byzantines a century later.
Large swathes of indigenous peoples regained self-governance in Masuna and its numerous successor polities in the Maghreb, including the kingdoms of Ouarsenis, Aurès, and Altava.
In the western Sahel the rise of settled communities occurred largely as a result of the domestication of millet and of sorghum, and cattle pastoralism began c.
Extensive east-west belts of deserts, grasslands, and forests from north to south were crucial for the moulding of their respective societies and meant that symbiotic trade relations developed in response to the differing environments.
Beginning around 4000 BC, the Tichitt culture in modern-day Mauritania and Mali is the oldest known complexly organised society in West Africa, while others included the Kintampo culture in modern-day Ghana, the Nok culture in modern-day Nigeria, and the Daima culture around Lake Chad.
Towards the end of the 3rd century AD, a wet period in the Sahel created areas for human habitation and exploitation that had not been habitable for the best part of a millennium.
The Ghana Empire (also called Wagadu) rose out of the Tichitt culture, growing wealthy following the introduction of the camel to the western Sahel, which revolutionised the trans-Saharan trade that linked their capital and Aoudaghost with Tahert and Sijilmasa in North Africa.
Soninke tradition holds that the final founding of Wagadu occurred after Dinga did a deal with Bida, a serpent deity who was guarding a well, to sacrifice one maiden a year in exchange for assurance regarding plenty of rainfall and gold supply.
Based on large tumuli scattered across West Africa dating to this period, several scholars have speculated that there were further simultaneous and preceding states relative to Wagadu.
In the Grasslands of northwestern Cameroon, Bantu-speaking agriculturalists started to gradually migrate south sometime between 5000 BC and 3000 BC.
Despite intensive research, the cause of the migrations, and that of the directions taken, is still unclear, however there is consensus that there were multiple dispersal events.
Around 1500 BC, Bantu speakers reached central Cameroon.
The 'Western Stream' likely followed the coast and the major rivers of the Congo system southwards to reach the southern fringe of the Congolian Rainforest around 500 BC (some may have used the sea to circumvent the rainforest).
Their arrival coincided with the spread of iron metallurgy through Central Africa.
Meanwhile, the 'Eastern Stream' travelled either the northern fringe of the rainforest or the Ubangi River eastwards, and reached just west of Lake Victoria around 500 BC.
While there, Bantu speakers adopted iron metallurgy from Cushitic speakers already present, and coexisted with them.
Dispersal from the Great Lakes region occurred in two more streams.
One went west to meet the Western Stream in the DR Congo and Angola, while the other went south and spread across Eastern and Southern Africa.
Around the turn of the millennium, Bantu speakers reached central modern-day Tanzania and near Dar es Salaam, before rapidly moving southwards along the coast to reach modern-day Kwazulu Natal in South Africa around the 3rd century AD.
Throughout this, Bantu speakers displaced, replaced, or intermarried with and absorbed hunter-gatherer and agricultural groups.
Pre-colonial Africa possessed as many as 10,000 different states and polities.
These included small family groups of hunter-gatherers such as the San people of southern Africa; larger, more structured groups such as the family clan groupings of the Bantu peoples of central, southern, and eastern Africa; heavily structured clan groups in the Horn of Africa; the large Sahelian kingdoms; and autonomous city-states and kingdoms, such as those of the Akan; Edo, Yoruba, and Igbo people in West Africa; and the Swahili coastal trading towns of Southeast Africa.
By the 9th century AD, a string of dynastic states, including the earliest Hausa states, stretched across the sub-Saharan savannah from the western regions to central Sudan.
The most powerful of these states were Ghana, Gao, and the Kanem-Bornu Empire.
Ghana declined in the eleventh century, but was succeeded by the Mali Empire, which consolidated much of western Sudan in the thirteenth century.
Kanem accepted Islam in the eleventh century.
In the forested regions of the West African coast, independent kingdoms grew with little influence from the Muslim north.
The Kingdom of Nri, which was ruled by the Eze Nri, was established around the ninth century, making it one of the oldest kingdoms in present-day Nigeri.
The Nri kingdom is famous for its elaborate bronzes, found at the town of Igbo-Ukwu.
The Kingdom of Ife, historically the first of these Yoruba city-states or kingdoms, established government under a priestly oba ('king' or 'ruler' in the Yoruba language), called the Ooni of Ife.
Ife was noted as a major religious and cultural centre in West Africa and for its unique naturalistic tradition of bronze sculpture.
The Ife model of government was adapted by the Oyo Empire, whose obas, called the Alaafins of Oyo, controlled many other Yoruba and non-Yoruba city-states and kingdoms including the Fon Kingdom of Dahomey.
The Almoravids were a Berber dynasty from the Sahara that spread over northwestern Africa and the Iberian peninsula during the eleventh century.
The Banu Hilal and Banu Ma'qil were a collection of Arab Bedouin tribes from the Arabian Peninsula who migrated westwards via Egypt between the eleventh and thirteenth centuries.
Their migration resulted in the fusion of the Arabs and Berbers, where the locals were arabised, and Arab culture absorbed elements of the local culture, under the unifying framework of Islam.
Following the breakup of Mali, a local leader named Sonni Ali (1464–1492) founded the Songhai Empire in the region of middle Niger and the western Sudan and took control of the trans-Saharan trade.
Sonni Ali seized Timbuktu in 1468 and Jenne in 1473, building his regime on trade revenues and the cooperation of Muslim merchants.
His successor Askia Mohammad I (1493–1528) made Islam the official religion, built mosques, and brought to Gao Muslim scholars, including al-Maghili (d.
By the eleventh century, some Hausa states – such as Kano, Jigawa, Katsina, and Gobir – had developed into walled towns engaging in trade, servicing caravans, and the manufacture of goods.
Until the fifteenth century, these small states were on the periphery of the major Sudanic empires of the era, paying tribute to Songhai to the west and Kanem-Borno to the east.
Slavery had long been practiced in Africa.
Between the 15th and the 19th centuries, the Atlantic slave trade took an estimated 7–12 million slaves to the New World.
In addition, more than 1 million Europeans were captured by Barbary pirates and sold as slaves in North Africa between the 16th and 19th centuries.
The Trans-Saharan slave trade contributed to a mass movement of Africans across North Africa and wider Near East over several millennia.
Islamic caliphs with Sub-Saharan African ancestry include Abu al-Misk Kafur Al-Mustansir Billah, Yaqub al-Mansur, Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Othman, Sultan of the Marinid dynasty and Moulay Ismail Ibn Sharif.
In West Africa, the decline of the Atlantic slave trade in the 1820s caused dramatic economic shifts in local polities.
The gradual decline of slave-trading, prompted by a lack of demand for slaves in the New World, increasing anti-slavery legislation in Europe and America, and the British Royal Navy's increasing presence off the West African coast, obliged African states to adopt new economies.
Between 1808 and 1860, the British West Africa Squadron seized approximately 1,600 slave ships and freed 150,000 Africans who were aboard.
Action was also taken against African leaders who refused to agree to British treaties to outlaw the trade, for example against "the usurping King of Lagos", deposed in 1851.
Anti-slavery treaties were signed with over 50 African rulers.
The largest powers of West Africa (the Asante Confederacy, the Kingdom of Dahomey, and the Oyo Empire) adopted different ways of adapting to the shift.
Asante and Dahomey concentrated on the development of "legitimate commerce" in the form of palm oil, cocoa, timber and gold, forming the bedrock of West Africa's modern export trade.
The Oyo Empire, unable to adapt, collapsed into civil wars.
Imperial rule by Europeans continued until after the conclusion of World War II, when almost all remaining colonial territories gradually obtained formal independence.
Independence movements in Africa gained momentum following World War II, which left the major European powers weakened.
In 1951, Libya, a former Italian colony, gained independence.
In 1956, Tunisia and Morocco won their independence from France.
Ghana followed suit the next year (March 1957), becoming the first of the sub-Saharan colonies to be granted independence.
Over the next decade, waves of decolonisation took place across the continent, culminating in the 1960 Year of Africa and the establishment of the Organisation of African Unity in 1963.
Portugal's overseas presence in sub-Saharan Africa (most notably in Angola, Cape Verde, Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau, and São Tomé and Príncipe) lasted from the 16th century to 1975, after the Estado Novo regime was overthrown in a military coup in Lisbon.
Rhodesia unilaterally declared independence from the United Kingdom in 1965, under the white minority government of Ian Smith, but was not internationally recognised as an independent state (as Zimbabwe) until 1980, when black nationalists gained power after a bitter guerrilla war.
Although South Africa was one of the first African countries to gain independence, the state remained under the control of the country's white minority, initially through qualified voting rights and from 1956 by a system of racial segregation known as apartheid, until 1994.
As of 2025, Africa contains 54 sovereign countries.
Since independence, African states have frequently been hampered by instability, corruption, violence, and authoritarianism.
The vast majority of African states are republics that operate under some form of the presidential system of rule.
However, few of them have been able to sustain democratic governments on a permanent basis—per the criteria laid out by Lührmann et al.
Most African countries have experienced several coups or periods of military dictatorship.
Between 1990 and 2018, though, the continent as a whole has trended towards more democratic governance.
Upon independence an overwhelming majority of Africans lived in extreme poverty.
The continent suffered from the lack of infrastructural or industrial development under colonial rule, along with political instability.
With limited financial resources or access to global markets, relatively stable countries such as Kenya still experienced only very slow economic development.
Only a handful of African countries succeeded in obtaining rapid economic growth prior to 1990.
Exceptions include Libya and Equatorial Guinea, both of which possess large oil reserves.
Instability throughout the continent after decolonisation resulted primarily from marginalisation of ethnic groups, and corruption.
In pursuit of personal political gain, many leaders deliberately promoted ethnic conflicts, some of which had originated during the colonial period, such as from the grouping of multiple unrelated ethnic groups into a single colony, the splitting of a distinct ethnic group between multiple colonies, or existing conflicts being exacerbated by colonial rule (for instance, the preferential treatment given to ethnic Hutus over Tutsis in Rwanda during German and Belgian rule).
Faced with increasingly frequent and severe violence, military rule was widely accepted by the population of many countries as means to maintain order, and during the 1970s and 1980s a majority of African countries were controlled by military dictatorships.
Territorial disputes between nations and rebellions by groups seeking independence were also common in independent African states.
The most devastating of these was the Nigerian Civil War, fought between government forces and an Igbo separatist republic, which resulted in a famine that killed 1–2 million people.
Two civil wars in Sudan, the first lasting from 1955 to 1972 and the second from 1983 to 2005, collectively killed around 3 million.
Both were fought primarily on ethnic and religious lines.
Cold War conflicts between the United States and the Soviet Union also contributed to instability.
Both the Soviet Union and the United States offered considerable incentives to African political and military leaders who aligned themselves with the superpowers' foreign policy.
As an example, during the Angolan Civil War, the Soviet and Cuban aligned MPLA and the American aligned UNITA received the vast majority of their military and political support from these countries.
Many African countries became highly dependent on foreign aid.
The sudden loss of both Soviet and American aid at the end of the Cold War and fall of the USSR resulted in severe economic and political turmoil in the countries most dependent on foreign support.
There was a major famine in Ethiopia between 1983 and 1985, killing up to 1.
In 1994 a genocide in Rwanda resulted in up to 800,000 deaths, added to a severe refugee crisis and fueled the rise of militia groups in neighbouring countries.
This contributed to the outbreak of the first and second Congo Wars, which were the most devastating military conflicts in modern Africa, with up to 5.
Various conflicts between various insurgent groups and governments continue.
Since 2003, there has been an ongoing conflict in Darfur (Sudan), which peaked in intensity from 2003 to 2005 with notable spikes in violence in 2007 and 2013–15, killing around 300,000 people total.
The Boko Haram Insurgency primarily within Nigeria (with considerable fighting in Niger, Chad, and Cameroon as well) has killed around 350,000 people since 2009.
Most African conflicts have been reduced to low-intensity conflicts as of 2022.
However, the Tigray War from 2020 to 2022 killed an estimated 300,000–500,000 people, primarily due to famine.
Overall though, violence across Africa has greatly declined in the 21st century, with the end of civil wars in Angola, Sierra Leone, and Algeria in 2002, Liberia in 2003, and Sudan and Burundi in 2005.
The Second Congo War, which involved 9 countries and several insurgent groups, ended in 2003.
This decline in violence coincided with many countries abandoning communist-style command economies and opening up for market reforms, which over the course of the 1990s and 2000s promoted the establishment of permanent, peaceful trade between neighbouring countries (see Capitalist peace).
Improved stability and economic reforms have led to a great increase in foreign investment into many African nations, mainly from China, which further spurred economic growth.
Between 2000 and 2014, annual GDP growth in sub-Saharan Africa averaged 5.
North Africa experienced comparable growth rates.
A significant part of this growth can also be attributed to the facilitated diffusion of information technologies and specifically the mobile telephone.
While several individual countries have maintained high growth rates, since 2014 overall growth has considerably slowed, primarily as a result of falling commodity prices, continued lack of industrialisation, and epidemics of Ebola and COVID-19.
Africa is the largest of the three great southward projections from the largest landmass of the Earth.
Separated from Europe by the Mediterranean Sea, it is joined to Asia at its northeast extremity by the Isthmus of Suez (transected by the Suez Canal), 163 km (101 mi) wide.
Geopolitically, Egypt's Sinai Peninsula east of the Suez Canal is often considered part of Africa as well.
The coastline is 26,000 km (16,000 mi) long, and the absence of deep indentations of the shore is illustrated by the fact that Europe, which covers only 10,400,000 km2 (4,000,000 sq mi) – about a third of the surface of Africa – has a coastline of 32,000 km (20,000 mi).
From the most northerly point, Ras ben Sakka in Tunisia (37°21' N), to the most southerly point, Cape Agulhas in South Africa (34°51'15" S), is a distance of approximately 8,000 km (5,000 mi).
Cape Verde, 17°33'22" W, the westernmost point, is a distance of approximately 7,400 km (4,600 mi) to Ras Hafun, 51°27'52" E, the most easterly projection that neighbours Cape Guardafui, the tip of the Horn of Africa.
Africa's largest country is Algeria, and its smallest country is Seychelles, an archipelago off the east coast.
The smallest nation on the continental mainland is The Gambia.
The climate of Africa ranges from tropical to subarctic on its highest peaks.
Its northern half is primarily desert, or arid, while its central and southern areas contain both savanna plains and dense jungle (rainforest) regions.
In between, there is a convergence, where vegetation patterns such as sahel and steppe dominate.
Africa is the hottest continent on Earth and 60% of the entire land surface consists of drylands and deserts.
The record for the highest-ever recorded temperature, in Libya in 1922 (58 °C (136 °F)), was discredited in 2013.
Africa has over 3,000 protected areas, with 198 marine protected areas, 50 biosphere reserves, and 80 wetlands reserves.
Significant habitat destruction, increases in human population and poaching are reducing Africa's biological diversity and arable land.
Human encroachment, civil unrest and the introduction of non-native species threaten biodiversity in Africa.
This has been exacerbated by administrative problems, inadequate personnel and funding problems.
Deforestation is affecting Africa at twice the world rate, according to the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP).
The deforestation rate of 4.
According to the University of Pennsylvania African Studies Center, 31% of Africa's pasture lands and 19% of its forests and woodlands are classified as degraded, and Africa is losing over four million hectares of forest per year, which is twice the average deforestation rate for the rest of the world.
Some sources claim that approximately 90% of the original, virgin forests in West Africa have been destroyed.
Over 90% of Madagascar's original forests have been destroyed since the arrival of humans 2000 years ago.
About 65% of Africa's agricultural land suffers from soil degradation.
Africa boasts perhaps the world's largest combination of density and "range of freedom" of wild animal populations and diversity, with wild populations of large carnivores (such as lions, hyenas, and cheetahs) and herbivores (such as buffalo, elephants, camels, and giraffes) ranging freely on primarily open non-private plains.
It is also home to a variety of "jungle" animals including snakes and primates and aquatic life such as crocodiles and amphibians.
In addition, Africa has the largest number of megafauna species, as it was least affected by the extinction of the Pleistocene megafauna.
The African Union (AU) is a continental union consisting of 55 member states.
The union was formed, with Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, as its headquarters, on 26 June 2001.
The union was officially established on 9 July 2002 as a successor to the Organisation of African Unity (OAU).
In July 2004, the African Union's Pan-African Parliament (PAP) was relocated to Midrand, in South Africa, but the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights remained in Addis Ababa.
The African Union, not to be confused with the AU Commission, is formed by the Constitutive Act of the African Union, which aims to transform the African Economic Community, a federated commonwealth, into a state under established international conventions.
The African Union has a parliamentary government, known as the African Union Government, consisting of legislative, judicial and executive organs.
It is led by the African Union President and Head of State, who is also the President of the Pan-African Parliament.
A person becomes AU President by being elected to the PAP, and subsequently gaining majority support in the PAP.
The powers and authority of the President of the African Parliament derive from the Constitutive Act and the Protocol of the Pan-African Parliament, as well as the inheritance of presidential authority stipulated by African treaties and by international treaties, including those subordinating the Secretary General of the OAU Secretariat (AU Commission) to the PAP.
The government of the AU consists of all-union, regional, state, and municipal authorities, as well as hundreds of institutions, that together manage the day-to-day affairs of the institution.
Extensive human rights abuses still occur in several parts of Africa, often under the oversight of the state.
Most of such violations occur for political reasons, often as a side effect of civil war.
Countries where major human rights violations have been reported in recent times include the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Sudan, Zimbabwe, and Ivory Coast.
The countries in this table are categorised according to the scheme for geographic subregions used by the United Nations, and data included are per sources in cross-referenced articles.
Where they differ, provisos are clearly indicated.
This list contains nine territories that are administered as incorporated areas of a primarily non-African country but that belong geographically to the African continent.
Although it has abundant natural resources, Africa remains the world's poorest and least-developed continent (other than Antarctica), the result of a variety of causes that may include corrupt governments that have often committed serious human rights violations, failed central planning, high levels of illiteracy, low self-esteem, lack of access to foreign capital, legacies of colonialism, the slave trade, the Cold War, and frequent tribal and military conflict (ranging from guerrilla warfare to genocide).
The continent's total nominal GDP remains behind that of several individual countries, including the United States, China, Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom, India and France.
According to the United Nations' Human Development Report in 2003, the bottom 24 ranked nations (151st to 175th) were all African.
Poverty, illiteracy, malnutrition, inadequate water supply and sanitation, and poor health affect a large proportion of the people who reside on the African continent.
In August 2008, the World Bank announced revised global poverty estimates based on a new international poverty line of $1.
Eighty-one percent of the sub-Saharan African population was living on less than $2.
Sub-Saharan Africa is the least successful region of the world in reducing poverty ($1.
The average poor person in sub-Saharan Africa is estimated to live on only 70 cents per day, and was poorer in 2003 than in 1973, indicating increasing poverty in some areas.
Some of it is attributed to unsuccessful economic liberalisation programmes spearheaded by foreign companies and governments, but other studies have cited bad domestic government policies more than external factors.
Africa is now at risk of being in debt once again, particularly in sub-Saharan African countries.
The last debt crisis in 2005 was resolved with help from the heavily indebted poor countries scheme (HIPC).
The HIPC resulted in some positive and negative effects on the economy in Africa.
About ten years after the 2005 debt crisis in sub-Saharan Africa was resolved, Zambia fell back into debt.
A small reason was due to the fall in copper prices in 2011, but the bigger reason was that a large amount of the money Zambia borrowed was wasted or pocketed by the elite.
From 1995 to 2005, Africa's rate of economic growth increased, averaging 5% in 2005.
Some countries experienced still higher growth rates, notably Angola, Sudan and Equatorial Guinea, all of which had recently begun extracting their petroleum reserves or had expanded their oil extraction capacity.
The following table shows the projected nominal GDP and GDP per capita (at purchasing power parity) in 2026 by the IMF.
The continent is believed to hold 90% of the world's cobalt, 90% of its platinum, 50% of its gold, 98% of its chromium, 70% of its tantalite, 64% of its manganese and one-third of its uranium.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) has 70% of the world's coltan, a mineral used in the production of tantalum capacitors for electronic devices such as cell phones.
The DRC also has more than 30% of the world's diamond reserves.
Guinea is the world's largest exporter of bauxite.
As the growth in Africa has been driven mainly by services and not manufacturing or agriculture, it has been growth without jobs and without reduction in poverty levels.
In fact, the food security crisis of 2008, which took place following the global financial crisis, pushed 100 million people into food insecurity.
In 2024 nearly 307 million people in Africa were undernourished (46% of the global total), an increase of 10 million people since 2023 and 34 million from 2022.
In recent years, China has built increasingly stronger ties with African nations and is Africa's largest trading partner.
In 2007, Chinese companies invested a total of US$1 billion in Africa.
A Harvard University study led by professor Calestous Juma showed that Africa could feed itself by making the transition from importer to self-sufficiency.
Africa is starting to focus on agricultural innovation as its new engine for regional trade and prosperity.
Water development and management are complex in Africa due to the multiplicity of trans-boundary water resources (rivers, lakes and aquifers).
Around 75% of sub-Saharan Africa falls within 53 international river basin catchments that traverse multiple borders.
This particular constraint can also be converted into an opportunity if the potential for trans-boundary cooperation is harnessed in the development of the area's water resources.
A multi-sectoral analysis of the Zambezi River, for example, shows that riparian cooperation could lead to a 23% increase in firm energy production without any additional investments.
A number of institutional and legal frameworks for transboundary cooperation exist, such as the Zambezi River Authority, the Southern African Development Community (SADC) Protocol, Volta River Authority and the Nile Basin Commission.
However, additional efforts are required to further develop political will, as well as the financial capacities and institutional frameworks needed for win-win multilateral cooperative actions and optimal solutions for all riparians.
Africa is considered by anthropologists to be the most genetically diverse continent as a result of being the longest inhabited.
Africa's population has rapidly increased over the last 40 years, and is consequently relatively young.
In some African states, more than half the population is under 25 years of age.
The total number of people in Africa increased from 229 million in 1950 to 630 million in 1990.
As of 2021, the population of Africa is estimated at 1,394 million.
Africa's total population surpassing other continents is fairly recent; African population surpassed Europe in the 1990s, while the Americas was overtaken sometime around the year 2000.
This increase in number of babies born in Africa compared to the rest of the world is expected to reach approximately 37% in the year 2050; while in 1990 sub-Saharan Africa accounted for only 16% of the world's births.
The total fertility rate (children per woman) for Sub-Saharan Africa is 4.
All countries in sub-Saharan Africa had TFRs (average number of children) above replacement level in 2019 and accounted for 27.
In 2021, sub-Saharan Africa accounted for 29% of global births.
Speakers of Bantu languages (part of the Niger–Congo family) are the majority in southern, central and southeast Africa.
The Bantu-speaking peoples from the Sahel progressively expanded over most of sub-Saharan Africa.
But there are also several Nilotic groups in South Sudan and East Africa, the mixed Swahili people on the Swahili Coast, and a few remaining indigenous Khoisan ("San" or "Bushmen") and Pygmy peoples in Southern and Central Africa, respectively.
Bantu-speaking Africans also predominate in Gabon and Equatorial Guinea, and are found in parts of southern Cameroon.
In the Kalahari Desert of Southern Africa, the distinct people known as the Bushmen (also "San", closely related to, but distinct from "Hottentots") have long been present.
The San are physically distinct from other Africans and are the indigenous people of southern Africa.
Pygmies are the pre-Bantu indigenous peoples of central Africa.
The peoples of West Africa primarily speak Niger–Congo languages, belonging mostly to its non-Bantu branches, though some Nilo-Saharan and Afro-Asiatic speaking groups are also found.
The Niger–Congo-speaking Yoruba, Igbo, Fulani, Akan, and Wolof ethnic groups are the largest and most influential.
In the central Sahara, Mandinka or Mande groups are most significant.
Chadic-speaking groups, including the Hausa, are found in more northerly parts of the region nearest to the Sahara, and Nilo-Saharan communities, such as the Songhai, Kanuri, and Zarma, are found in the eastern parts of West Africa bordering Central Africa.
The peoples of North Africa consist of three main indigenous groups: Berbers in the northwest, Egyptians in the northeast, and Nilo-Saharan-speaking peoples in the east.
The Arabs who arrived in the 7th century AD introduced the Arabic language and Islam to North Africa.
The Semitic Phoenicians (who founded Carthage) and Hyksos, the Indo-Iranian Alans, the Indo-European Greeks, Romans, and Vandals settled in North Africa as well.
Significant Berber communities remain within Morocco and Algeria in the 21st century, while, to a lesser extent, Berber speakers are also present in some regions of Tunisia and Libya.
The Berber-speaking Tuareg and other often-nomadic peoples are the principal inhabitants of the Saharan interior of North Africa.
In Mauritania, there is a small but near-extinct Berber community in the north and Niger–Congo-speaking peoples in the south, though in both regions Arabic and Arab culture predominates.
In Sudan, although Arabic and Arab culture predominate, it is mostly inhabited by groups that originally spoke Nilo-Saharan, such as the Nubians, Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa, who, over the centuries, have variously intermixed with migrants from the Arabian peninsula.
Small communities of Afro-Asiatic-speaking Beja nomads can also be found in Egypt and Sudan.
In the Horn of Africa, some Ethiopian and Eritrean groups (like the Amhara and Tigrayans, collectively known as Habesha) speak languages from the Semitic branch of the Afro-Asiatic language family, while the Oromo and Somali speak languages from the Cushitic branch of Afro-Asiatic.
Prior to the decolonisation movements of the post-World War II era, Europeans were represented in every part of Africa.
Decolonization during the 1960s and 1970s often resulted in the mass emigration of white settlers—especially from Algeria and Morocco (1.
Between 1975 and 1977, over a million colonials returned to Portugal alone.
Nevertheless, white Africans remain an important minority in many African states, particularly Zimbabwe, Namibia, Réunion, and South Africa.
The country with the largest white African population is South Africa.
Dutch and British diasporas represent the largest communities of European ancestry on the continent today.
European colonisation also brought sizable groups of Asians, particularly from the Indian subcontinent, to British colonies.
Large Indian communities are found in South Africa, and smaller ones are present in Kenya, Tanzania, and some other southern and southeast African countries.
The large Indian community in Uganda was expelled by the dictator Idi Amin in 1972, though many have since returned.
The islands in the Indian Ocean are also populated primarily by people of Asian origin, often mixed with Africans and Europeans.
The Malagasy people of Madagascar are an Austronesian people, but those along the coast are generally mixed with Bantu, Arab, Indian and European origins.
Malay and Indian ancestries are also important components in the group of people known in South Africa as Cape Coloureds (people with origins in two or more races and continents).
During the 20th century, small but economically important communities of Lebanese have also developed in the larger coastal cities of West and East Africa, respectively.
The Sahara served as a trans-regional passageway and place of dwelling for people in Africa during various humid phases and periods throughout the history of Africa.
As early as 11,000 years ago, Sub-Saharan West Africans, bearing macrohaplogroup L (e.
The genetic marker E1b1 was identified to have wide distribution across Egypt, with "P2/215/M35.
The R haplogroup has also been identified to have high frequencies in central Saharan Africa, among some Afro-Asiatic and Nilo-Saharan language speaking groups.
Genetic evidence has identified the Horn of Africa to be the source of a genetic marker "M35/215" Y-chromosome lineage for a significant population component which moved north from that region into Egypt and the Levant.
Historian Christopher Ehret argued that this genetic distribution paralleled the spread of the Afrasian language family with the movement of people from the Horn of Africa into Egypt and added a new demic component to the existing population of Egypt 17,000 years ago.
According to a recent study, the Arab migrations to the Maghreb was mainly a demographic process that heavily implied gene flow and remodeled the genetic structure of the Maghreb region in North Africa, rather than a mere cultural replacement as claimed by older studies.
Another study found out that the majority of J-M267 (Eu10) chromosomes in the Maghreb are due to the recent gene flow caused by the Arab migrations to the Maghreb in the first millennium CE as both southern Qahtanite and northern Adnanite Arabs added to the heterogenous Maghrebi ethnic melting pot.
The Eu10 chromosome pool in the Maghreb is derived not only from early Neolithic dispersions from Western Asia but to a much greater extent from recent expansions of Arab tribes from the Arabian Peninsula.
While acknowledging the genetic impact of Arabization of Northwest Africa during the Islamic period, other authors have suggested that earlier migration processes, such as the arrival of Neolithic Revolution era famers from Western Asia and Southern Europe together with Bronze Age and Iron Age input from Mesopotamia and the Levant were ultimately more genetically impactful.
David Schoenbrun, Christopher Ehret, Steven A.
Brandt and Shomarka Keita (2025) have highlighted the problematic categorisation of genetic haplogroups characterised as ‘African’ and ‘Eurasian' in North African genome studies.
In reference to the van de Loosdrecht et al.
In their view, identifying a range of African populations may still remain an issue “since the idea of ‘African’ still gets stereotyped or restricted.
While Africans profess a wide variety of religious beliefs, the majority of the people respect African religions or parts of them.
However, in formal surveys or census, most people will identify with major religions that came from outside the continent, mainly through colonisation.
There are several reasons for this, the main one being the colonial idea that African religious beliefs and practices are not good enough.
Religious beliefs and statistics on religious affiliation are difficult to come by since they are often a sensitive topic for governments with mixed religious populations.
According to the World Book Encyclopedia, Islam and Christianity are the two largest religions in Africa.
Islam is most prevalent in Northern Africa, and is the state religion of many North African countries, such as Algeria, where 99% of the population practices Islam.
The majority of people in most governments in Southern, Southeast, and Central Africa, as well as in a sizable portion of the Horn of Africa and West Africa, identify as Christians.
The Coptic Christians constitute a sizable minority in Egypt, and the Ethiopian Orthodox Church is the largest church in Ethiopia, with 36 million and 51 million adherents.
According to Encyclopædia Britannica, 45% of the population are Christians, 40% are Muslims, and 10% follow traditional religions.
A small number of Africans are Hindu, Buddhist, Confucianist, Baháʼí, or Jewish.
There is also a minority of people in Africa who are irreligious.
By most estimates, well over a thousand languages (UNESCO has estimated around two thousand) are spoken in Africa.
Most are of African origin, though some are of European or Asian origin.
Africa is the most multilingual continent in the world, and it is not rare for individuals to fluently speak not only multiple African languages, but one or more European ones as well.
The Afroasiatic languages are a language family of about 240 languages and 285 million people widespread throughout the Horn of Africa, North Africa, the Sahel, and Southwest Asia.
The Nilo-Saharan languages consist of a group of several possibly related families, spoken by 30 million people between 100 languages.
Nilo-Saharan languages are spoken by ethnic groups in Chad, Ethiopia, Kenya, Nigeria, Sudan, South Sudan, Uganda, and northern Tanzania.
The Niger-Congo language family covers much of sub-Saharan Africa.
In terms of number of languages, it is the largest language family in Africa and perhaps one of the largest in the world.
The Khoisan languages form a group of three unrelated families and two isolates and number about fifty in total.
They are mainly spoken in Southern Africa by approximately 400,000 people.
Many of the Khoisan languages are endangered.
The Khoi and San peoples are considered the original inhabitants of this part of Africa.
Following the end of colonialism, nearly all African countries adopted official languages that originated outside the continent, although several countries also granted legal recognition to indigenous languages (such as Swahili, Yoruba, Igbo and Hausa).
In numerous countries, English and French (see African French) are used for communication in the public sphere such as government, commerce, education and the media.
Arabic, Portuguese, Afrikaans and Spanish are examples of languages that trace their origin to outside of Africa, and that are used by millions of Africans today, both in the public and private spheres.
Italian is spoken by some in former Italian colonies in Africa.
German is spoken in Namibia, as it was a former German protectorate.
In total, at least a fifth of Africans speak the former colonial languages.
Moreover, in recent years some African countries have been considering removing their official former colonial languages, such as Mali, Burkina Faso and Niger which removed French as an official language in the 2020s in favour of native languages, while also renaming colonial street names.
More than 85% of individuals in Africa use traditional medicine as an alternative to often expensive allopathic medical health care and costly pharmaceutical products.
The Organization of African Unity (OAU) Heads of State and Government declared the 2000s decade as the African Decade on African traditional medicine in an effort to promote The WHO African Region's adopted resolution for institutionalising traditional medicine in health care systems across the continent.
Public policy makers in the region are challenged with consideration of the importance of traditional/indigenous health systems and whether their coexistence with the modern medical and health sub-sector would improve the equitability and accessibility of health care distribution, the health status of populations, and the social-economic development of nations within sub-Saharan Africa.
AIDS in post-colonial Africa is a prevalent issue.
Although the continent is home to about 15.
Sub-Saharan Africa alone accounted for an estimated 69 percent of all people living with HIV and 70 percent of all AIDS deaths in 2011.
In the countries of sub-Saharan Africa most affected, AIDS has raised death rates and lowered life expectancy among adults between the ages of 20 and 49 by about twenty years.
Furthermore, the life expectancy in many parts of Africa has declined, largely as a result of the HIV/AIDS epidemic with life-expectancy in some countries reaching as low as thirty-four years.
Africa is divided into a great number of ethnic cultures.
The continent's cultural regeneration has also been an integral aspect of post-independence nation-building on the continent, with a recognition of the need to harness the cultural resources of Africa to enrich the process of education, requiring the creation of an enabling environment in several ways.
In recent times, the call for a much greater emphasis on the cultural dimension in all aspects of development has become increasingly vocal.
Some aspects of traditional African cultures have become less practised in recent years as a result of neglect and suppression by colonial and post-colonial regimes.
For example, African customs were discouraged, and African languages were prohibited in mission schools, while colonialists such as Leopold II of Belgium attempted to "civilize" Africans by discouraging polygamy and witchcraft.
Abiola Irele and Simon Gikandi comment that the current identity of African literature had its genesis in the "traumatic encounter between Africa and Europe".
On the other hand, Mhoze Chikowero believes that Africans deployed music, dance, spirituality, and other performative cultures to (re)assert themselves as active agents and indigenous intellectuals, to unmake their colonial marginalisation and reshape their own destinies.
As of March 2023, 98 African properties are listed by UNESCO as World Heritage Sites.
Among these proprieties, 54 are cultural sites, 39 are natural sites and 5 are mixed sites.
The List of World Heritage in Danger includes 15 African sites.
Obidoh Freeborn posits that colonialism is one element that has created the character of modern African art.
According to authors Douglas Fraser and Herbert M.
Cole, "The precipitous alterations in the power structure wrought by colonialism were quickly followed by drastic iconographic changes in the art.
Author Chika Okeke-Agulu states that "the racist infrastructure of British imperial enterprise forced upon the political and cultural guardians of empire a denial and suppression of an emergent sovereign Africa and modernist art".
Fifty-four African countries have football teams in the Confederation of African Football.
Egypt has won the African Cup seven times, and a record-making three times in a row.
Cameroon, Nigeria, Morocco, Senegal, Ghana, and Algeria have advanced to the knockout stage of recent FIFA World Cups.
Morocco, at the 2022 World Cup in Qatar was the first African nation to reach the semi-finals of the FIFA Men's World Cup.
South Africa hosted the 2010 World Cup tournament, becoming the first African country to do so.
The top clubs in each African football league play the CAF Champions League, while lower-ranked clubs compete in CAF Confederation Cup.
In recent years, the continent has progressed in terms of state-of-the-art basketball facilities, which have been built in cities such as Cairo, Dakar, Johannesburg, Kigali, Luanda, and Rades.
The number of African basketball players who drafted into the U.
NBA has experienced growth in the 2010s.
Cricket is popular in some African nations.
South Africa and Zimbabwe have Test status, while Kenya is the leading non-test team and previously had One-Day International cricket (ODI) status (from 10 October 1997, until 30 January 2014).
The three countries jointly hosted the 2003 Cricket World Cup.
Namibia is the other African country to have played in a World Cup.
Morocco, in northern Africa, hosted the 2002 Morocco Cup, but the national team has never qualified for a major tournament.
Rugby is popular in several southern African nations.
Namibia and Zimbabwe have appeared on multiple occasions at the Rugby World Cup, while South Africa is the most successful national team at the Rugby World Cup, having won the tournament on four occasions, in 1995, 2007, 2019, and 2023.
Traditional sports were strictly marginalised during the colonial era, and many are dying or have gone extinct under the pressure of modernisation, however lots remain popular despite not having formal governmental recognition or support.
Some examples are Senegalese wrestling, Dambe, Nguni stick-fighting, and Savika.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY 4.
Text taken from Global Forest Resources Assessment 2025​, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY 4.
Text taken from World Food and Agriculture – Statistical Yearbook 2025​, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Brantlinger, Patrick (1985).
A History of Sub-Saharan Africa.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-68708-9.
European Investment Bank (6 July 2022c).
EIB Group Sustainability Report 2021.
European Investment Bank.
ISBN 978-92-861-5237-5.
Malone, Jacqui (1996).
Steppin' on the Blues: the Visible Rhythms of African American Dance.
University of Illinois Press.
Robinson, Ronald; Gallagher, John; Denny, Alice (1978) [1961].
Africa and the Victorians: The official mind of imperialism (2 ed.
ISBN 978-0-333-31006-9.
Shillington, Kevin (2005).
ISBN 978-0-333-59957-0.
Southall, Roger; Melber, Henning (2009).
A New Scramble For Africa?
University of KwaZulu-Natal Press.
Welsh-Asante, Kariamu (2009).
ISBN 978-1-4381-2427-8.
Encyclopædia Britannica.
Asia ( AY-zhə, UK also AY-shə) is the largest continent in the world by both land area and population.
It covers an area of more than 44 million square kilometres, about 30% of Earth's total land area and 8% of Earth's total surface area.
The continent, which has long been home to the majority of the human population, was the site of many of the first civilisations.
Asia shares the landmass of Eurasia with Europe, and of Afro-Eurasia with both Europe and Africa.
In general terms, it is bounded on the east by the Pacific Ocean, on the south by the Indian Ocean, and on the north by the Arctic Ocean.
The border of Asia with Europe is a historical and cultural construct, as there is no clear physical and geographical separation between them.
A commonly accepted division places Asia to the east of the Suez Canal separating it from Africa; and to the east of the Turkish straits, the Ural Mountains and Ural River, and to the south of the Caucasus Mountains and the Caspian and Black seas, separating it from Europe.
Since the concept of Asia derives from the term for the eastern region from a European perspective, Asia is the remaining vast area of Eurasia minus Europe.
Therefore, Asia is a region where various independent cultures coexist rather than sharing a single culture, and its boundary with Europe is somewhat arbitrary and has moved since its first conception in classical antiquity.
The division of Eurasia into two continents reflects East–West cultural differences, some of which vary on a spectrum.
China and India traded places as the largest economies in the world from 1 to 1800 CE.
China was a major economic power for much of recorded history, with the highest GDP per capita until 1500.
The Silk Road became the main east–west trading route in the Asian hinterlands while the Straits of Malacca stood as a major sea route.
Asia has exhibited economic dynamism as well as robust population growth during the 20th century, but overall population growth has since fallen.
Asia was the birthplace of most of the world's mainstream religions including Buddhism, Christianity, Confucianism, Hinduism, Islam, Jainism, Judaism, Sikhism, Taoism, Zoroastrianism, and many other religions.
Asia varies greatly across and within its regions with regard to ethnic groups, cultures, environments, economics, historical ties, and government systems.
It also has a mix of many different climates ranging from the equatorial south via the hot deserts in parts of West Asia, Central Asia, South Asia, and East Asia and tropical jungles in Southeast Asia, temperate areas in the east and the continental centre to vast subarctic and polar areas in North Asia.
The term "Asia" is believed to originate in the Bronze Age toponym Assuwa (Hittite: 𒀸𒋗𒉿, romanized: aš-šu-wa) which originally referred only to a portion of northwestern Anatolia.
The term appears in Hittite records recounting how a confederation of Assuwan states including Troy unsuccessfully rebelled against the Hittite king Tudhaliya I around 1400 BCE.
Roughly contemporary Linear B documents contain the term aswia (Mycenaean Greek: 𐀀𐀯𐀹𐀊, romanized: a-si-wi-ja), seemingly in reference to captives from the same area.
Herodotus used the term in reference to Anatolia and the territory of the Achaemenid Empire, in contrast to Greece and Egypt.
He reports that Greeks assumed that Asia was named after the wife of Prometheus, but that Lydians say it was named after Asies, son of Cotys, who passed the name on to a tribe at Sardis.
In Greek mythology, "Asia" (Ἀσία or Ἀσίη) was the name of a "Nymph or Titan goddess of Lydia".
The Iliad (attributed by the ancient Greeks to Homer) mentions two Phrygians in the Trojan War named Asios (literally 'Asian'); and also a marsh or lowland containing a marsh in Lydia as ασιος.
The term was later adopted by the Romans, who used it in reference to the province of Asia, located in western Anatolia.
One of the first writers to use Asia as a name of the whole continent was Pliny.
The threefold division of the Old World into Africa, Asia, and Europe has been in use since the 6th century BCE, due to Greek geographers such as Anaximander and Hecataeus.
Anaximander placed the boundary between Asia and Europe along the Phasis River (now the Rioni) in Georgia of Caucasus (from its mouth by Poti on the Black Sea coast, through the Surami Pass and along the Kura River to the Caspian Sea), a convention still followed by Herodotus in the 5th century BCE.
During the Hellenistic period, this convention was revised, and the boundary between Europe and Asia was now considered to be the Tanais (the modern Don River).
This is the convention used by Roman era authors such as Posidonius, Strabo and Ptolemy.
The border between Asia and Europe was historically defined by European academics.
In Sweden, five years after Peter's death, in 1730 Philip Johan von Strahlenberg published a new atlas proposing the Ural Mountains as the border of Asia.
Tatishchev announced that he had proposed the idea to von Strahlenberg.
The latter had suggested the Emba River as the lower boundary.
Over the next century various proposals were made until the Ural River prevailed in the mid-19th century.
The border had been moved perforce from the Black Sea to the Caspian Sea into which the Ural River projects.
The border between the Black Sea and the Caspian is often placed along the crest of the Caucasus Mountains, although it is sometimes placed further north, on the Kuma–Manych Depression.
The boundary between Asia and Africa is the Suez Canal, the Gulf of Suez, the Red Sea, and the Bab-el-Mandeb.
This makes Egypt a transcontinental country, with the Sinai Peninsula in Asia and the remainder of the country in Africa.
The border between Asia and Oceania is usually placed somewhere in the Indonesian Archipelago, specifically in Eastern Indonesia.
The Wallace Line separates the Asian and Wallacea biogeographical realms, a transition zone of deep water straits between the Asian and Australian continental shelves.
Weber's Line split the region in two with regard to the balance of fauna between Asian origin or Australo-Papuan origin.
Wallacea's eastern boundary with Sahul is represented by the Lydekker's Line.
The Maluku Islands (except the Aru Islands) are often considered to lie on the border of southeast Asia, with the Aru Islands and Western New Guinea, to the east of the Lydekker's Line, being wholly part of Oceania, as both lie on the Australian continental plate.
Culturally, the Wallacea region denoted the transition between Austronesian and Melanesian people, with varying degrees of intermixing between the two.
In general, the further west and coastal a region is, the stronger the Austronesian influences, and the further east and inland a region is, the stronger the Melanesian influences.
The terms Southeast Asia and Oceania, devised in the 19th century, have had several vastly different geographic meanings since their inception.
The chief factor in determining which islands of the Indonesian Archipelago are Asian has been the location of the colonial possessions of the various empires there (not all European).
Lewis and Wigen assert, "The narrowing of 'Southeast Asia' to its present boundaries was thus a gradual process.
The Bering Strait and Bering Sea separate the landmasses of Asia and North America, as well as forming the international boundary between Russia and the United States.
This national and continental boundary separates the Diomede Islands in the Bering Strait, with Big Diomede in Russia and Little Diomede in the United States.
The Aleutian Islands are an island chain extending westward from the Alaskan Peninsula toward Russia's Komandorski Islands and Kamchatka Peninsula.
Most of them are always associated with North America, except for the westernmost Near Islands group, which is on Asia's continental shelf beyond the North Aleutians Basin and on rare occasions could be associated with Asia, which could then allow the United States to be considered a transcontinental state.
The Aleutian Islands are sometimes associated with Oceania, owing to their status as remote Pacific islands, and their proximity to the Pacific Plate.
This is extremely rare however, due to their non-tropical biogeography, as well as their inhabitants, who have historically been related to the Indigenous peoples of the Americas.
Lawrence Island in the northern Bering Sea belongs to the US state of Alaska and may be associated with either continent but is almost always considered part of North America, as with the Rat Islands in the Aleutian chain.
At their nearest points, Alaska and Russia are separated by only 4 kilometres (2.
Geographical Asia is a cultural artifact of European conceptions of the world, beginning with the Ancient Greeks, being imposed onto other cultures, an imprecise concept causing endemic contention about what it means.
Asia does not exactly correspond to the cultural borders of its various types of constituents.
From the time of Herodotus, a minority of geographers have rejected the three-continent system (Europe, Africa, Asia) on the grounds that there is no substantial physical separation between them.
For example, Sir Barry Cunliffe, the emeritus professor of European archeology at Oxford, argues that Europe has been geographically and culturally merely "the western excrescence of the continent of Asia".
Geographically, Asia is the major eastern constituent of the continent of Eurasia with Europe being a northwestern peninsula of the landmass.
Asia, Europe and Africa make up a single continuous landmass—Afro-Eurasia—and share a common continental shelf.
Almost all of Europe and a major part of Asia sit atop the Eurasian Plate, adjoined on the south by the Arabian and Indian Plate and with the easternmost part of Siberia (east of the Chersky Range) on the North American Plate.
This species is believed to have lived in East and Southeast Asia from 1.
Researchers believe that the modern human, or Homo sapiens, migrated about 60,000 years ago to South Asia along the Indian Ocean.
Modern humans interbred with an archaic human species called Denisovans in Southeast Asia.
Before the arrival of modern humans, Flores was occupied by Homo floresiensis, a small archaic human.
Ancestors of East Eurasians split from Ancient West Eurasians about 46,000 years ago, migrating out of the hub in the Iranian Plateau.
Evidence from full genomic studies suggests that the first people in the Americas diverged from Ancient East Asians about 36,000 years ago and expanded northwards into Siberia, where they encountered and interacted with a different Paleolithic Siberian population (known as Ancient North Eurasians), giving rise to both Paleosiberian peoples and Ancient Native Americans.
Modern South Asians are descendants of a combination of Western Eurasian ancestries (notably Neolithic Iranian and Western Steppe Herder components) with a proposed indigenous East Eurasian component (termed Ancient Ancestral South Indians) closest to the non–West Eurasian part extracted from South Asian samples; distantly related to the Andamanese peoples, East Asians and Aboriginal Australians.
The history of Asia can be seen as the distinct histories of several peripheral coastal regions: East Asia, South Asia, Southeast Asia, Central Asia, and West Asia.
The coastal periphery was home to some of the world's earliest known civilisations, each of them developing around fertile river valleys.
The civilisations in Mesopotamia, the Indus Valley and the Yellow River shared many similarities.
These civilisations may well have exchanged technologies and ideas such as mathematics and the wheel.
Other innovations, such as writing, seem to have been developed individually in each area.
Cities, states and empires developed in these lowlands.
The central steppe region had long been inhabited by horse-mounted nomads who could reach all areas of Asia from the steppes.
The earliest postulated expansion out of the steppe is that of the Indo-Europeans, who spread their languages into West Asia, South Asia, and the borders of China, where the Tocharians resided.
The northernmost part of Asia, including much of Siberia, was largely inaccessible to the steppe nomads, owing to the dense forests, climate and tundra.
These areas remained very sparsely populated.
The center and the peripheries were mostly kept separated by mountains and deserts.
The Caucasus and Himalaya mountains and the Karakum and Gobi deserts formed barriers that the steppe horsemen could cross only with difficulty.
While the urban city dwellers were more advanced technologically and socially, in many cases they could do little in a military aspect to defend against the mounted hordes of the steppe.
However, the lowlands did not have enough open grasslands to support a large equestrian force; for this and other reasons, the nomads who conquered states in China, India, and the Middle East often found themselves adapting to the local, more affluent societies.
The Islamic Caliphate's defeats of the Byzantine and Persian empires led to West Asia and southern parts of Central Asia and western parts of South Asia under its control during its conquests of the 7th century; Islam also spread over centuries to the southern regions of India and Southeast Asia through trade along the Maritime Silk Road.
The Mongol Empire conquered a large part of Asia in the 13th century, an area extending from China to Europe.
Before the Mongol invasion, Song dynasty reportedly had approximately 120 million citizens; the 1300 census which followed the invasion reported roughly 60 million people.
The Black Death, one of the most devastating pandemics in human history, is thought to have originated in the arid plains of central Asia, where it then travelled along the Silk Road.
European involvement in Asia became more significant from the Age of Discovery onward, with Iberian-sponsored sailors such as Christopher Columbus and Vasco da Gama paving the way for new routes from Atlantic Europe to Pacific Asia and the Indian Ocean respectively in the late 15th century.
The Russian Empire also began to expand into northwestern Asia from the 17th century, and would eventually take control of all of Siberia and most of Central Asia by the end of the 19th century.
Among non-European empires, the Ottoman Empire controlled Anatolia, most of the Middle East, North Africa and the Balkans from the mid 16th century onward, while in the 17th century, the Manchu conquered China and established the Qing dynasty.
The Islamic Mughal Empire (preceded by the Delhi Sultanate of the 13th to early 16th century) and the Hindu Maratha Empire controlled much of India in the 16th and 18th centuries respectively.
Western imperialism in Asia from the 18th to 20th centuries coincided with the Industrial Revolution in the West and the dethroning of India and China as the world's foremost economies.
The British Empire first became dominant in South Asia, with most of the region being conquered by British traders in the late 18th and early 19th centuries before falling under direct British rule after a failed 1857 revolt; the 1869 completion of the Suez Canal, which increased British access to India, went on to further European influence over Africa and Asia.
Around this time, Western powers started to dominate China in what later became known as the century of humiliation, with the British-supported opium trade and later Opium Wars resulting in China being forced into an unprecedented situation of importing more than it exported.
Foreign domination of China was furthered by the Japanese colonial empire, which controlled some of East Asia and briefly much of Southeast Asia (which had earlier been taken over by the British, Dutch and French in the late 19th century), New Guinea and the Pacific islands; Japan's domination was enabled by its rapid rise that had taken place during the Meiji era of the late 19th century, in which it applied industrial knowledge learned from the West and thus overtook the rest of Asia.
One significant influence on Japan had been the United States, which had begun projecting influence across the Pacific after its early-to-mid-19th century westward expansion.
The breakup of the Ottoman Empire in the early 20th century led to the Middle East also being contested and partitioned by the British and French.
With the end of World War II in 1945 and the wartime ruination of Europe and imperial Japan, many countries in Asia were able to rapidly free themselves of colonial rule.
The independence of India came along with the carving out of a separate nation for the majority of South Asian Muslims, which in 1971 further split into Pakistan and Bangladesh; The Cold War in Asia strained relations between India and Pakistan and affected Asia more generally.
The end of the Cold War and the Soviet Union by 1991 saw the independence of the five modern Central Asian countries.
Some Arab countries took economic advantage of massive oil deposits that were discovered in their territory, becoming globally influential, though stability in the Middle East has been affected since 1948 by the Arab–Israeli conflict and American-led interventions.
East Asian nations (along with Singapore in Southeast Asia) became economically prosperous with high-growth "tiger economies"; China, having undergone the reform and opening up under Deng Xiaoping, regained its place among the top two economies of the world by the 21st century.
India has also grown significantly because of economic liberalisation that started in the 1990s, with extreme poverty now below 20%; India and China's rise has coincided with growing tensions between the two, with the Indo-Pacific now an actively contested area between China and counterbalancing forces.
Asia is the largest continent on Earth.
It covers 9% of the Earth's total surface area (or 30% of its land area), and has the longest coastline, at 62,800 kilometres (39,022 mi).
Asia is generally defined as comprising the eastern four-fifths of Eurasia.
It is located to the east of the Suez Canal and the Ural Mountains, and south of the Caucasus Mountains (or the Kuma–Manych Depression) and the Caspian and Black Seas.
It is bounded on the east by the Pacific Ocean, on the south by the Indian Ocean and on the north by the Arctic Ocean.
Asia is subdivided into 49 countries, five of them (Georgia, Azerbaijan, Russia, Kazakhstan and Turkey) are transcontinental countries lying partly in Europe.
Geographically, Russia is partly and mostly in Asia, but is considered a European nation, both culturally and politically.
The Gobi Desert is in Mongolia and the Arabian Desert stretches across much of the Middle East.
The Yangtze in China is the longest river in the continent.
The Himalayas between Nepal and China is the tallest mountain range in the world.
Tropical rainforests stretch across much of southern Asia and coniferous and deciduous forests lie farther north.
Between 1990–2000 the area of primary forest in Asia decreased by 1.
There are various approaches to the regional division of Asia.
The following subdivision into regions is used, among others, by the United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD).
This division of Asia into regions by the United Nations is done solely for statistical reasons and does not imply any assumption about political or other affiliations of countries and territories.
Asia has extremely diverse climate features.
Climates range from Arctic and subarctic in Siberia to tropical in southern India and Southeast Asia.
It is moist across southeast sections, and dry across much of the interior.
Some of the largest daily temperature ranges on Earth occur in western sections of Asia.
The monsoon circulation dominates across southern and eastern sections, due to the presence of the Himalayas forcing the formation of a thermal low which draws in moisture during the summer.
Southwestern sections of the continent are hot.
Siberia is one of the coldest places in the Northern Hemisphere, and can act as a source of arctic air masses for North America.
The most active place on Earth for tropical cyclone activity lies northeast of the Philippines and south of Japan.
The most democratic countries in Asia are Japan, Taiwan and South Korea according to the V-Dem Democracy indices.
Within the states mentioned above are several partially recognized countries with limited to no international recognition.
Asia is both the largest continental economy in the world by both GDP nominal and PPP values and the world's fastest growing economic region.
As of 2026, China is by far the largest economy on the continent.
It is followed by India, Japan, South Korea, Turkey, Indonesia, Saudi Arabia, and Taiwan, which are all ranked among the top 20 largest economies by both nominal GDP and PPP values.
Based on Global Office Locations 2011, Asia dominated global office locations with 4 of the top 5 being in Asia: Hong Kong, Singapore, Tokyo and Seoul.
Around 68% of international firms have an office in Hong Kong.
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the economy of China had an average annual growth rate of more than 8%.
According to economic historian Angus Maddison, India had the world's largest economy for much of the past three millennia prior to the 19th century, accounting for 25% of the world's industrial output.
China was the largest and most advanced economy on Earth for much of recorded history and shared the mantle with India.
For several decades in the late twentieth century, Japan was the largest economy in Asia and second-largest in the world, after surpassing the Soviet Union (measured in net material product) in 1990 and Germany in 1968.
This ended in 2010, when China overtook Japan to become the world's second largest economy.
In 2025, India overtook Japan in terms of nominal GDP to become the world's 4th largest and Asia's 2nd largest economy.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Japan's GDP by currency exchange rates was almost as large as that of the rest of Asia combined.
In 1995, Japan's economy nearly equaled that of the US as the largest economy in the world for a day, after the Japanese currency reached a record high of 79 yen/US$.
Economic growth in Asia since World War II to the 1990s had been concentrated in Japan as well as South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore, known as the Four Asian Tigers, which are now all considered developed economies, having among the highest GDP per capita in Asia.
Asia is the largest continent in the world by a considerable margin, and it is rich in natural resources, such as petroleum, forests, fish, water, rice, copper and silver.
Manufacturing in Asia has traditionally been strongest in East and Southeast Asia, particularly in China, Taiwan, South Korea, Japan, India, the Philippines, and Singapore.
Japan and South Korea continue to dominate in the area of multinational corporations, though increasingly China and India are making significant inroads.
Many companies from Europe, North America, South Korea, and Japan have operations in Asia's developing countries to take advantage of its abundant supply of cheap labour and relatively developed infrastructure.
According to Citigroup in 2011, 9 of 11 Global Growth Generator countries came from Asia driven by population and income growth.
They are Bangladesh, China, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Mongolia, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Vietnam.
Asia has three main financial centers: Hong Kong, Tokyo, and Singapore.
Call centers and business process outsourcing firms (BPOs) are becoming major employers in India and the Philippines due to the availability of a large pool of highly skilled, English-speaking workers.
The increased use of outsourcing has assisted the rise of India and the China as financial centers.
Due to its large and extremely competitive information technology industry, India has become a major hub for outsourcing.
Trade between Asian countries and countries on other continents is largely carried out via sea routes.
The main route leads from the Chinese coast south via Hanoi to Jakarta, Singapore, and Kuala Lumpur, through the Strait of Malacca via Colombo to the southern tip of India, then via Malé to Mombasa in East Africa (see also Indo-Pacific), from there to Djibouti, then through the Red Sea and the Suez Canal into the Mediterranean (see also: Indo-Mediterranean), then via Haifa, Istanbul, and Athens to the northern Italian hub of Trieste, with its rail connections to Central and Eastern Europe, or further to Barcelona and around Spain and France to northern European ports.
A far smaller part of the goods traffic runs via South Africa to Europe.
A particularly significant part of Asian goods traffic is carried out on the Pacific Rim, toward Los Angeles and Long Beach.
The melting of the Arctic is also paving the way for new shipping routes from Northeast Asia to Europe and North America.
The land route to Europe is also the subject of construction projects, comparatively smaller in scope.
Intra-Asian trade, including sea trade, is growing rapidly.
In 2011, Asia topped Europe in the number of millionaires.
Citigroup in The Wealth Report 2012 stated that the total wealth of people in Asia with over $100 million in assets exceeded that of their North American counterparts for the first time, as the world's "economic center of gravity" continued moving east.
At the end of 2011, there were 18,000 people in Asia, mainly in Southeast Asia, China, and Japan, with at least $100 million in disposable assets, compared to North America with 17,000 and Western Europe with 14,000.
Asia’s electricity demand has quadrupled since 2000 (rising from 4,199 TWh to over 16,000 TWh in 2024).
This growth, driven largely by China and increasingly by India, Indonesia, and Viet Nam, makes Asia the fastest-growing region for electricity demand globally, at about 5% per year.
The region now accounts for about 36% of global primary energy consumption, a share projected to approach 50% by 2050.
However, coal is slowly being phased out and natural gas is displacing oil and oil products in various sectors, supported by policies and regulations.
Natural gas demand in emerging market and developing economies in Asia expanded by around 6% in 2024, accounting for nearly 40% of incremental global gas demand.
By 2040, Asia is expected to account for the majority of global coal use and over a quarter of natural gas consumption.
At the same time, Asia is the global leader in renewable energy expansion.
It is currently the only region on track to meet the goal of tripling renewable capacity by 2030, largely due to China, the leading nation in renewable energy generation.
China’s wind and solar capacity has surged in recent years, together overtaking that of coal, while in 2024 India become the world’s third largest generator of electricity from wind and solar.
Nearly half of the world's new renewable energy capacity is built in Asia.
In 2013, with regional tourism growing and dominated by Chinese visitors, MasterCard released the Global Destination Cities Index report, in which 10 of 20 cities are Asian and Pacific cities.
This was also the first time an Asian city (Bangkok) was in the number one spot, with 15.
East Asia had by far the strongest overall Human Development Index (HDI) improvement of any region in the world, nearly doubling average HDI attainment over the past 40 years, according to the report's analysis of health, education and income data.
China, the second highest achiever in the world in terms of HDI improvement since 1970, is the only country on the "Top 10 Movers" list due to income rather than health or education achievements.
Its per capita income increased a stunning 21-fold over the last four decades, also lifting hundreds of millions out of income poverty.
Yet it was not among the region's top performers in improving school enrollment and life expectancy.
Nepal, a South Asian country, emerges as one of the world's fastest movers since 1970 mainly due to health and education achievements.
Its present life expectancy is 25 years longer than in the 1970s.
More than four of every five children of school age in Nepal now attend primary school, compared to just one in five 40 years ago.
Hong Kong ranked highest among the countries grouped on the HDI (number 7 in the world, which is in the "very high human development" category), followed by Singapore (9), Japan (19) and South Korea (22).
Afghanistan (155) ranked lowest amongst Asian countries out of the 169 countries assessed.
Asia is home to several language families and many language isolates.
Most Asian countries have more than one language that is natively spoken.
For instance, according to Ethnologue, more than 700 languages are spoken in Indonesia, more than 400 languages spoken in India, and more than 100 are spoken in the Philippines.
China has many languages and dialects in different provinces.
Many of the world's major religions have their origins in Asia, including the five most practiced in the world (excluding irreligion), which are Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Chinese folk religion (classified as Confucianism and Taoism), and Buddhism.
Asian mythology is complex and diverse.
The story of the Great Flood for example, as presented to Jews in the Hebrew Bible in the narrative of Noah—and later to Christians in the Old Testament, and to Muslims in the Quran—is earliest found in Mesopotamian mythology, in the Enûma Eliš and Epic of Gilgamesh.
Hindu mythology similarly tells about an avatar of Vishnu in the form of a fish who warned Manu of a terrible flood.
Ancient Chinese mythology also tells of a Great Flood spanning generations, one that required the combined efforts of emperors and divinities to control.
The Abrahamic religions including Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Druze faith, and Baháʼí Faith originated in West Asia.
Judaism, the oldest of the Abrahamic faiths, is practiced primarily in Israel, the indigenous homeland and historical birthplace of the Hebrew nation: which today consists both of those Jews who remained in the Middle East and those who returned from diaspora in Europe, North America, and other regions; though various diaspora communities persist worldwide.
Jews are the predominant ethnic group in Israel (75.
Outside of Israel there are small ancient Jewish communities in Turkey (17,400), Azerbaijan (9,100), Iran (8,756), India (5,000) and Uzbekistan (4,000), among many other places.
As of 2016, there are am estimated 14.
Christianity is a widespread religion in Asia, with more than 286 million adherents in 2010 according to Pew Research Center, and nearly 364 million according to Britannica Book of the Year 2014.
Christians constitute around 12.
In the Philippines and Timor-Leste, Catholicism is the predominant religion; it was introduced by the Spaniards and the Portuguese, respectively.
In Armenia and Georgia, Eastern Orthodoxy is the predominant religion.
In the Middle East, such as in the Levant, Anatolia and Fars, Syriac Christianity (Church of the East) and Oriental Orthodoxy are prevalent minority denominations, which are both Eastern Christian sects mainly adhered to Assyrian people or Syriac Christians.
Vibrant indigenous minorities in West Asia are adhering to the Eastern Catholic Churches and Eastern Orthodoxy.
Saint Thomas Christians in India trace their origins to the evangelistic activity of Thomas the Apostle in the 1st century.
Significant Christian communities also found in Central Asia, South Asia, Southeast Asia and East Asia.
Islam, which originated in the Hejaz located in modern-day Saudi Arabia, is the second largest and most widely-spread religion in Asia with at least 1 billion Muslims constituting around 23.
Mecca, Medina and Jerusalem are the three holiest cities for Islam in all the world.
The Hajj and Umrah attract large numbers of Muslim devotees from all over the world to Mecca and Medina.
Iran is the largest Shia country.
The Druze originated in West Asia, is a monotheistic religion based on the teachings of figures like Hamza ibn Ali and al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah, and Greek philosophers such as Plato and Aristotle.
The number of Druze people worldwide is around one million.
Around 45–50% live in Syria, 35% to 40% live in Lebanon, and less than 10% live in Israel.
Recently there has been a growing Druze diaspora.
The Baháʼí Faith originated in Asia, in Iran (Persia), and spread from there to the Ottoman Empire, Central Asia, India, and Burma during the lifetime of Bahá'u'lláh.
Since the middle of the 20th century, growth has particularly occurred in other Asian countries, because Baháʼí activities in many Muslim countries has been severely suppressed by authorities.
Lotus Temple is a big Baháʼí temple in India.
Almost all Asian religions have philosophical character and Asian philosophical traditions cover a large spectrum of philosophical thoughts and writings.
Indian philosophy includes Hindu philosophy and Buddhist philosophy.
They include elements of nonmaterial pursuits, whereas another school of thought from India, Cārvāka, preached the enjoyment of the material world.
The religions of Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism originated in India, South Asia.
In East Asia, particularly in China and Japan, Confucianism, Taoism and Zen Buddhism took shape.
As of 2012, Hinduism has around 1.
The faith represents around 25% of Asia's population and is the largest religion in Asia.
However, it is mostly concentrated in South Asia.
Over 80% of the populations of both India and Nepal adhere to Hinduism, alongside significant communities in Bangladesh, Pakistan, Bhutan, Sri Lanka and Bali, Indonesia.
Many overseas Indians in countries such as Burma, Singapore and Malaysia also adhere to Hinduism.
Buddhism has a great following in Mainland Southeast Asia and East Asia.
Buddhism is the religion of the majority of the populations of Cambodia (96%), Thailand (95%), Burma (80–89%), Japan (36–96%), Bhutan (75–84%), Sri Lanka (70%), Laos (60–67%) and Mongolia (53–93%).
Taiwan (35–93%), South Korea (23–50%), Malaysia (19–21%), Nepal (9–11%), Vietnam (10–75%), China (20–50%), Singapore (31%), North Korea (2–14%), and small communities in India and Bangladesh.
The Communist-governed countries of China, Vietnam and North Korea are officially atheist, thus the number of Buddhists and other religious adherents may be under-reported.
Jainism is found mainly in India and in overseas Indian communities such as the United States and Malaysia.
Sikhism is found in Northern India and amongst overseas Indian communities in other parts of Asia, especially Southeast Asia.
Confucianism is found predominantly in mainland China, South Korea, Taiwan and in overseas Chinese populations.
Taoism is found mainly in mainland China, Taiwan, Malaysia and Singapore.
In many Chinese communities, Taoism is easily syncretised with Mahayana Buddhism, thus exact religious statistics are difficult to obtain and may be understated or overstated.
The culture of Asia is a diverse blend of customs and traditions that have been practiced by the various ethnic groups of the continent for centuries.
The continent is divided into six geographic sub-regions: Central Asia, East Asia, North Asia, South Asia, Southeast Asia, and West Asia.
These regions are defined by their cultural similarities, including common religions, languages, and ethnicities.
West Asia, also known as Southwest Asia or the Middle East, has cultural roots in the ancient civilisations of the Fertile Crescent and Mesopotamia, which gave rise to the Persian, Arab, Ottoman empires, as well as the Abrahamic religions of Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
These civilisations, which are located in the Hilly flanks, are among the oldest in the world, with evidence of farming dating back to around 9000 BCE.
Despite the challenges posed by the vast size of the continent and the presence of natural barriers such as deserts and mountain ranges, trade and commerce have helped to create a Pan-Asian culture that is shared across the region.
Rabindranath Tagore, a Bengali dramatist and author from Santiniketan (now in West Bengal, India), won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1913, becoming the first Asian Nobel laureate.
The prize was awarded for Tagore's prose works and poetry, which had a significant additional impact on national literatures throughout the Western world.
Tagore also authored both the Indian and Bangladeshi national anthems.
Other Asian writers who won Nobel Prize for literature include Yasunari Kawabata (Japan, 1968), Kenzaburō Ōe (Japan, 1994), Gao Xingjian (China, 2000), Orhan Pamuk (Turkey, 2006), Mo Yan (China, 2012), and Han Kang (South Korea, 2024).
Some may consider the American writer, Pearl S.
Buck, an honorary Asian Nobel laureate, having spent considerable time in China as the daughter of missionaries, and based many of her novels, namely The Good Earth (1931) and The Mother (1933), as well as the biographies of her parents for their time in China, The Exile and Fighting Angel, all of which earned her the Literature prize in 1938.
Mother Teresa of India and Shirin Ebadi of Iran were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for their significant and pioneering efforts for democracy and human rights, especially for the rights of women and children.
Ebadi is the first Iranian and the first Muslim woman to receive the prize.
Another Nobel Peace Prize winner is Aung San Suu Kyi from Burma for her peaceful and non-violent struggle under a military dictatorship in Burma.
She is a nonviolent pro-democracy activist and leader of the National League for Democracy in Burma (Myanmar) and a noted prisoner of conscience.
She is a Buddhist and was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991.
Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for "his long and non-violent struggle for fundamental human rights in China" on 8 October 2010.
He is the first Chinese citizen to be awarded a Nobel Prize of any kind while residing in China.
In 2014, Kailash Satyarthi from India and Malala Yousafzai from Pakistan were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize "for their struggle against the suppression of children and young people and for the right of all children to education".
Raman is the first Asian to get a Nobel prize in Sciences.
He won the Nobel Prize in Physics "for his work on the scattering of light and for the discovery of the effect named after him".
Japan has won the most Nobel Prizes of any Asian nation with 24 followed by India which has won 13.
Other Asian Nobel Prize winners include Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, Abdus Salam, Robert Aumann, Menachem Begin, Aaron Ciechanover, Avram Hershko, Daniel Kahneman, Shimon Peres, Yitzhak Rabin, Ada Yonath, Yasser Arafat, José Ramos-Horta and Bishop Carlos Filipe Ximenes Belo of Timor-Leste, Kim Dae-jung, and 13 Japanese scientists.
Most of the said awardees are from Japan and Israel except for Chandrasekhar and Raman (India), Abdus Salam (Pakistan), Arafat (Palestinian Territories), Kim (South Korea), and Horta and Belo (Timor-Leste).
In 2006, the Bangladeshi Muhammad Yunus of was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for the establishment of Grameen Bank, a community development bank that lends money to poor people, especially women.
He is known for the concept of micro credit which, allows poor and destitute people to borrow money.
The borrowers pay back money within the specified period and defaulting is very low.
Yunus also became the leader of an interim government after the 2024 Bangladesh quota reform movement.
The Dalai Lama received the Nobel Peace Prize, in Oslo, Norway in 1989.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY 4.
Text taken from Global Forest Resources Assessment 2025​, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
The myth of continents: a critique of metageography.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
ISBN 978-0-520-20743-1.
Ventris, Michael; Chadwick, John (1973).
Documents in Mycenaean Greek (2nd ed.
Cambridge University Press.
Encyclopedia of Ancient Asian Civilizations.
Facts on File library of world history.
New York: Facts On File, 2004.
Kapadia, Feroz, and Mandira Mukherjee.
Encyclopaedia of Asian Culture and Society.
New Delhi: Anmol Publications, 1999.
Levinson, David, and Karen Christensen, eds.
Encyclopedia of Modern Asia.
Charles Scribner's Sons, 2002).
Wang, Hui (31 March 2011).
The Politics of Imagining Asia.
Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press.
ISBN 978-0-674-05519-3.
Encyclopædia Britannica.
The Soil Maps of Asia.
European Digital Archive of Soil Maps – EuDASM.
Archived from the original on 12 August 2011.
Retrieved 26 July 2011.
Perry–Castañeda Library Map Collection.
University of Texas Libraries.
Archived from the original on 18 July 2011.
Retrieved 20 July 2011.
Leventhal Map Center at the Boston Public Library.
Archived from the original on 29 September 2011.
Retrieved 26 July 2011.
Bowring, Philip (12 February 1987).
Eastern Economic Review.
Archived from the original on 28 July 2011.
Retrieved 22 April 2009.
Europe is a continent located entirely in the Northern Hemisphere and mostly in the Eastern Hemisphere.
It is bordered by the Arctic Ocean to the north, the Atlantic Ocean to the west, the Mediterranean Sea to the south, and Asia to the east.
Europe shares the landmass of Eurasia with Asia, and of Afro-Eurasia with both Africa and Asia.
Europe is commonly considered to be separated from Asia by the watershed of the Ural Mountains, the Ural River, the Caspian Sea, the Greater Caucasus, the Black Sea, and the Turkish straits.
Europe covers approx.
Politically, Europe is divided into about fifty sovereign states, of which Russia is the largest and most populous, spanning 39% of the continent and comprising 15% of its population.
Europe had a total population of about 745 million (about 10% of the world population) in 2021; the third-largest after Asia and Africa.
The European climate is affected by warm Atlantic currents, such as the Gulf Stream, which produce a temperate climate, tempering winters and summers, on much of the continent.
Further from the sea, seasonal differences are more noticeable producing more continental climates.
The culture of Europe consists of a range of national and regional cultures, which form the central roots of the wider Western civilisation, and together commonly reference ancient Greece and ancient Rome, particularly through their Christian successors, as crucial and shared roots.
Beginning with the fall of the Western Roman Empire in 476 CE, Christian consolidation of Europe in the wake of the Migration Period marked the European post-classical Middle Ages.
The Italian Renaissance spread across many Western European countries, adapting to local contexts and giving rise to distinct national expressions.
The renewed humanist emphasis on art and science was among the several factors that contributed to the broader transition to the modern era.
Since the Age of Discovery, led by Spain and Portugal, Europe played a predominant role in global affairs with multiple explorations and conquests around the world.
Between the 16th and 20th centuries, European powers colonised at various times the Americas, almost all of Africa and Oceania, and the majority of Asia.
The Age of Enlightenment, the French Revolution, and the Napoleonic Wars shaped the continent culturally, politically, and economically from the end of the 17th century until the first half of the 19th century.
The Industrial Revolution, which began in Great Britain at the end of the 18th century, gave rise to radical economic, cultural, and social change in Western Europe and eventually the wider world.
Both world wars began and were fought to a great extent in Europe, contributing to a decline in Western European dominance in world affairs by the mid-20th century as the Soviet Union and the United States took prominence and competed over ideological dominance and international influence in Europe and globally.
The resulting Cold War divided Europe along the Iron Curtain, with NATO in the West and the Warsaw Pact in the East.
This divide ended with the Revolutions of 1989, the fall of the Berlin Wall, and the dissolution of the Soviet Union, which allowed European integration to advance significantly.
European integration has been advanced institutionally since 1948 with the founding of the Council of Europe, and significantly through the realisation of the European Union (EU), which represents today the majority of Europe.
The European Union is a supranational political entity that lies between a confederation and a federation and is based on a system of European treaties.
The EU originated in Western Europe but has been expanding eastward since the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991.
A majority of its members have adopted a common currency, the euro, and participate in the European single market and a customs union.
A large bloc of countries, the Schengen Area, have also abolished internal border and immigration controls.
Regular popular elections take place every five years within the EU; they are considered the second-largest democratic elections in the world after India's.
The EU economy is the second-largest in the world by nominal GDP and third-largest by PPP-adjusted GDP.
In classical Greek mythology, Europa (Ancient Greek: Εὐρώπη, Eurṓpē) was a Phoenician princess.
One view is that her name derives from the Ancient Greek elements εὐρύς (eurús) 'wide, broad', and ὤψ (ōps, gen.
Broad has been an epithet of Earth herself in the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European religion and the poetry devoted to it.
An alternative view is that of Robert Beekes, who has argued in favour of a pre-Indo-European origin for the name, explaining that a derivation from eurus would yield a different toponym than Europa.
Beekes has located toponyms related to that of Europa in the territory of ancient Greece, and localities such as that of Europos in ancient Macedonia.
There have been attempts to connect Eurṓpē to a Semitic term for west, this being either Akkadian erebu meaning 'to go down, set' (said of the sun) or Phoenician 'ereb 'evening, west', which is at the origin of Arabic maghreb and Hebrew ma'arav.
Martin Litchfield West stated that "phonologically, the match between Europa's name and any form of the Semitic word is very poor", while Beekes considers a connection to Semitic languages improbable.
Most major world languages use words derived from Eurṓpē or Europa to refer to the continent.
Chinese, for example, uses the word Ōuzhōu (歐洲/欧洲), which is an abbreviation of the transliterated name Ōuluóbā zhōu (歐羅巴洲) (zhōu means "continent"); a similar Chinese-derived term Ōshū (欧州) is also sometimes used in Japanese such as in the Japanese name of the European Union, Ōshū Rengō (欧州連合), despite the katakana Yōroppa (ヨーロッパ) being more commonly used.
In some Turkic languages, the originally Persian name Frangistan ("land of the Franks") is used casually in referring to much of Europe, besides official names such as Avrupa or Evropa.
The prevalent definition of Europe as a geographical term has been in use since the mid-19th century.
Europe is taken to be bounded by large bodies of water to the north, west and south; Europe's limits to the east and north-east are usually taken to be the Ural Mountains, the Ural River, and the Caspian Sea; to the south-east, the Caucasus Mountains, the Black Sea, and the waterways connecting the Black Sea to the Mediterranean Sea.
Islands are generally grouped with the nearest continental landmass, hence Iceland is considered to be part of Europe, while the nearby island of Greenland is usually assigned to North America, although politically belonging to Denmark.
Nevertheless, there are some exceptions based on sociopolitical and cultural differences.
Cyprus is closest to Anatolia (or Asia Minor), but is considered part of Europe politically and it is a member state of the EU.
Malta was considered an island of North-western Africa for centuries, but now it is considered to be part of Europe as well.
The term "continent" usually implies the physical geography of a large land mass completely or almost completely surrounded by water at its borders.
Prior to the adoption of the current convention that includes mountain divides, the border between Europe and Asia had been redefined several times since its first conception in classical antiquity, but always as a series of rivers, seas and straits that were believed to extend an unknown distance east and north from the Mediterranean Sea without the inclusion of any mountain ranges.
Cartographer Herman Moll suggested in 1715 that Europe was bounded by a series of partly joined waterways directed towards the Turkish straits, and the Irtysh River draining into the upper part of the Ob River and the Arctic Ocean.
In contrast, the present eastern boundary of Europe partially adheres to the Ural and Caucasus Mountains, which is somewhat arbitrary and inconsistent compared to any clear-cut definition of the term "continent".
The current division of Eurasia into two continents now reflects East-West cultural, linguistic and ethnic differences which vary on a spectrum rather than with a sharp dividing line.
The geographic border between Europe and Asia does not follow any state boundaries and now only follows a few bodies of water.
Turkey is generally considered a transcontinental country divided entirely by water, while Russia and Kazakhstan are only partly divided by waterways.
France, the Netherlands, Portugal and Spain are also transcontinental (or more properly, intercontinental, when oceans or large seas are involved) in that their main land areas are in Europe while pockets of their territories are located on other continents separated from Europe by large bodies of water.
Spain, for example, has territories (Ceuta and Melilla) south of the Mediterranean Sea which are parts of Africa and share a border with Morocco.
According to the current convention, Georgia and Azerbaijan are transcontinental countries where waterways have been completely replaced by mountains as the divide between continents.
The first recorded usage of Eurṓpē as a geographic term is in the Homeric Hymn to Delian Apollo, in reference to the western shore of the Aegean Sea.
As a name for a part of the known world, it is first used in the 6th century BCE by Anaximander and Hecataeus.
Anaximander placed the boundary between Asia and Europe along the Phasis River (the modern Rioni River on the territory of Georgia) in the Caucasus, a convention still followed by Herodotus in the 5th century BCE.
Herodotus mentioned that the world had been divided by unknown persons into three parts—Europe, Asia, and Libya (Africa)—with the Nile and the Phasis forming their boundaries—though he also states that some considered the River Don, rather than the Phasis, as the boundary between Europe and Asia.
Europe's eastern frontier was defined in the 1st century by geographer Strabo at the River Don.
The Book of Jubilees described the continents as the lands given by Noah to his three sons; Europe was defined as stretching from the Pillars of Hercules at the Strait of Gibraltar, separating it from Northwest Africa, to the Don, separating it from Asia.
The convention received by the Middle Ages and surviving into modern usage is that of the Roman era used by Roman-era authors such as Posidonius, Strabo, and Ptolemy, who took the Tanais (the modern Don River) as the boundary.
The Roman Empire did not attach a strong identity to the concept of continental divisions.
However, following the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the culture that developed in its place, linked to Latin and the Catholic church, began to associate itself with the concept of "Europe".
The term "Europe" is first used for a cultural sphere in the Carolingian Renaissance of the 9th century.
From that time, the term designated the sphere of influence of the Western Church, as opposed to both the Eastern Orthodox churches and to the Islamic world.
A cultural definition of Europe as the lands of Latin Christendom coalesced in the 8th century, signifying the new cultural condominium created through the confluence of Germanic traditions and Christian-Latin culture, defined partly in contrast with Byzantium and Islam, and limited to northern Iberia, the British Isles, France, Christianised western Germany, the Alpine regions and northern and central Italy.
The concept is one of the lasting legacies of the Carolingian Renaissance: Europa often figures in the letters of Charlemagne's court scholar, Alcuin.
The transition of Europe to being a cultural term as well as a geographic one led to the borders of Europe being affected by cultural considerations in the East, especially relating to areas under Byzantine, Ottoman, and Russian influence.
Such questions were affected by the positive connotations associated with the term Europe by its users.
Such cultural considerations were not applied to the Americas, despite their conquest and settlement by European states.
Instead, the concept of "Western civilisation" emerged as a way of grouping together Europe and these colonies.
The question of defining a precise eastern boundary of Europe arises in the Early Modern period, as the eastern extension of Muscovy began to include North Asia.
Throughout the Middle Ages and into the 18th century, the traditional division of the landmass of Eurasia into two continents, Europe and Asia, followed Ptolemy, with the boundary following the Turkish Straits, the Black Sea, the Kerch Strait, the Sea of Azov and the Don (ancient Tanais).
But maps produced during the 16th to 18th centuries tended to differ in how to continue the boundary beyond the Don bend at Kalach-na-Donu (where it is closest to the Volga, now joined with it by the Volga–Don Canal), into territory not described in any detail by the ancient geographers.
Around 1715, Herman Moll produced a map showing the northern part of the Ob River and the Irtysh River, a major tributary of the Ob, as components of a series of partly joined waterways taking the boundary between Europe and Asia from the Turkish Straits, and the Don River all the way to the Arctic Ocean.
In 1721, he produced a more up to date map that was easier to read.
However, his proposal to adhere to major rivers as the line of demarcation was never taken up by other geographers who were beginning to move away from the idea of water boundaries as the only legitimate divides between Europe and Asia.
Four years later, in 1725, Philip Johan von Strahlenberg was the first to depart from the classical Don boundary.
He drew a new line along the Volga, following the Volga north until the Samara Bend, along Obshchy Syrt (the drainage divide between the Volga and Ural Rivers), then north and east along the latter waterway to its source in the Ural Mountains.
At this point he proposed that mountain ranges could be included as boundaries between continents as alternatives to nearby waterways.
Accordingly, he drew the new boundary north along the Ural Mountains rather than the nearby and parallel running Ob and Irtysh rivers.
This was endorsed by the Russian Empire and introduced the convention that would eventually become commonly accepted.
However, this did not come without criticism.
Voltaire, writing in 1760 about Peter the Great's efforts to make Russia more European, ignored the whole boundary question with his claim that neither Russia, Scandinavia, northern Germany, nor Poland were fully part of Europe.
Since then, many modern analytical geographers like Halford Mackinder have declared that they see little validity in the Ural Mountains as a boundary between continents.
The mapmakers continued to differ on the boundary between the lower Don and Samara well into the 19th century.
The 1745 atlas published by the Russian Academy of Sciences has the boundary follow the Don beyond Kalach as far as Serafimovich before cutting north towards Arkhangelsk, while other 18th- to 19th-century mapmakers such as John Cary followed Strahlenberg's prescription.
To the south, the Kuma–Manych Depression was identified c.
By the mid-19th century, there were three main conventions, one following the Don, the Volga–Don Canal and the Volga, the other following the Kuma–Manych Depression to the Caspian and then the Ural River, and the third abandoning the Don altogether, following the Greater Caucasus watershed to the Caspian.
The question was still treated as a "controversy" in geographical literature of the 1860s, with Douglas Freshfield advocating the Caucasus crest boundary as the "best possible", citing support from various "modern geographers".
In Russia and the Soviet Union, the boundary along the Kuma–Manych Depression was the most commonly used as early as 1906.
In 1958, the Soviet Geographical Society formally recommended that the boundary between the Europe and Asia be drawn in textbooks from Baydaratskaya Bay, on the Kara Sea, along the eastern foot of Ural Mountains, then following the Ural River until the Mugodzhar Hills, and then the Emba River; and Kuma–Manych Depression, thus placing the Caucasus entirely in Asia and the Urals entirely in Europe.
The Flora Europaea adopted a boundary along the Terek and Kuban rivers, so southwards from the Kuma and the Manych, but still with the Caucasus entirely in Asia.
However, most geographers in the Soviet Union favoured the boundary along the Caucasus crest, and this became the common convention in the later 20th century, although the Kuma–Manych boundary remained in use in some 20th-century maps.
Lewis and Kären Wigen argue that the separation of Eurasia into Asia and Europe of vastly uneven sizes produces a false impression of parity between European and Asian countries, as a residue of Eurocentrism: "In physical, cultural and historical diversity, China and India are comparable to the entire European landmass, not to a single European country.
The long glacial periods were separated by more temperate and shorter interglacials which lasted about 10,000–15,000 years.
The last cold episode of the last glacial period ended about 10,000 years ago.
Earth is currently in an interglacial period of the Quaternary, called the Holocene.
Homo erectus georgicus, which lived roughly 1.
Other hominin remains, dating back roughly 1 million years, have been discovered in Atapuerca, Spain.
Neanderthal man (named after the Neandertal valley in Germany) appeared in Europe 150,000 years ago (115,000 years ago it is found already in the territory of present-day Poland) and disappeared from the fossil record about 40,000 years ago, with their final refuge being the Iberian Peninsula.
The Neanderthals were supplanted by modern humans (Cro-Magnons), who seem to have appeared in Europe around 43,000 to 40,000 years ago.
However, there is also evidence that Homo sapiens arrived in Europe around 54,000 years ago, some 10,000 years earlier than previously thought.
The earliest sites in Europe dated 48,000 years ago are Riparo Mochi (Italy), Geissenklösterle (Germany) and Isturitz (France).
The European Neolithic period—marked by the cultivation of crops and the raising of livestock, increased numbers of settlements and the widespread use of pottery—began around 7000 BCE in Greece and the Balkans, probably influenced by earlier farming practices in Anatolia and the Near East.
It spread from the Balkans along the valleys of the Danube and the Rhine (Linear Pottery culture), and along the Mediterranean coast (Cardial culture).
Between 4500 and 3000 BCE, these central European neolithic cultures developed further to the west and the north, transmitting newly acquired skills in producing copper artifacts.
In Western Europe the Neolithic period was characterised not by large agricultural settlements but by field monuments, such as causewayed enclosures, burial mounds and megalithic tombs.
The Corded Ware cultural horizon flourished at the transition from the Neolithic to the Chalcolithic.
During this period giant megalithic monuments, such as the Megalithic Temples of Malta and Stonehenge, were constructed throughout Western and Southern Europe.
The modern native populations of Europe largely descend from three distinct lineages: Mesolithic hunter-gatherers, descended from populations associated with the Paleolithic Epigravettian culture; Neolithic Early European Farmers who migrated from Anatolia during the Neolithic Revolution 9,000 years ago; and Yamnaya Steppe herders who expanded into Europe from the Pontic–Caspian steppe of Ukraine and southern Russia in the context of Indo-European migrations 5,000 years ago.
The European Bronze Age began c.
The Minoans were followed by the Myceneans, who collapsed suddenly around 1200 BCE, ushering the European Iron Age.
Iron Age colonisation by the Greeks and Phoenicians gave rise to early Mediterranean cities.
Early Iron Age Italy and Greece from around the 8th century BCE gradually gave rise to historical Classical antiquity, whose beginning is sometimes dated to 776 BCE, the year of the first Olympic Games.
Ancient Greece was the founding culture of Western civilisation.
Western democratic and rationalist culture are often attributed to Ancient Greece.
The Greek city-state, the polis, was the fundamental political unit of classical Greece.
In 508 BCE, Cleisthenes instituted the world's first democratic system of government in Athens.
The Greek political ideals were rediscovered in the late 18th century by European philosophers and idealists.
Greece also generated many cultural contributions: in philosophy, humanism and rationalism under Aristotle, Socrates and Plato; in history with Herodotus and Thucydides; in dramatic and narrative verse, starting with the epic poems of Homer; in drama with Sophocles and Euripides; in medicine with Hippocrates and Galen; and in science with Pythagoras, Euclid, and Archimedes.
In the course of the 5th century BCE, several of the Greek city states would ultimately check the Achaemenid Persian advance in Europe through the Greco-Persian Wars, considered a pivotal moment in world history, as the 50 years of peace that followed are known as Golden Age of Athens, the seminal period of ancient Greece that laid many of the foundations of Western civilisation.
Greece was followed by Rome, which left its mark on law, politics, language, engineering, architecture, government, and many more key aspects in western civilisation.
By 200 BCE, Rome had conquered Italy and over the following two centuries it conquered Greece, Hispania (Spain and Portugal), the North African coast, much of the Middle East, Gaul (France and Belgium), and Britannia (England and Wales).
Expanding from their base in central Italy beginning in the third century BCE, the Romans gradually expanded to eventually rule the entire Mediterranean basin and Western Europe by the turn of the millennium.
The Roman Republic ended in 27 BCE, when Augustus proclaimed the Roman Empire.
The two centuries that followed are known as the pax romana, a period of unprecedented peace, prosperity and political stability in most of Europe.
The empire continued to expand under emperors such as Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius, who spent time on the Empire's northern border fighting Germanic, Pictish and Scottish tribes.
Christianity was legalised by Constantine I in 313 CE after three centuries of imperial persecution.
Constantine also permanently moved the capital of the empire from Rome to the city of Byzantium (modern-day Istanbul) which was renamed Constantinople in his honour in 330 CE.
Christianity became the sole official religion of the empire in 380 CE, and in 391–392 CE the emperor Theodosius outlawed pagan religions.
This is sometimes considered to mark the end of antiquity; alternatively antiquity is considered to end with the fall of the Western Roman Empire in 476 CE; the closure of the pagan Platonic Academy of Athens in 529 CE; or the rise of Islam in the early 7th century CE.
During most of its existence, the Byzantine Empire was one of the most powerful economic, cultural, and military forces in Europe.
During the decline of the Roman Empire, Europe entered a long period of change arising from what historians call the "Age of Migrations".
There were numerous invasions and migrations amongst the Ostrogoths, Visigoths, Goths, Vandals, Huns, Franks, Angles, Saxons, Slavs, Avars, Bulgars, Vikings, Pechenegs, Cumans, and Magyars.
Renaissance thinkers such as Petrarch would later refer to this as the "Dark Ages".
Isolated monastic communities were the only places to safeguard and compile written knowledge accumulated previously; apart from this, very few written records survive.
Much literature, philosophy, mathematics, and other thinking from the classical period disappeared from Western Europe, though they were preserved in the east, in the Byzantine Empire.
While the Roman empire in the west continued to decline, Roman traditions and the Roman state remained strong in the predominantly Greek-speaking Eastern Roman Empire, also known as the Byzantine Empire.
During most of its existence, the Byzantine Empire was the most powerful economic, cultural, and military force in Europe.
Emperor Justinian I presided over Constantinople's first golden age: he established a legal code that forms the basis of many modern legal systems, funded the construction of the Hagia Sophia and brought the Christian church under state control.
From the 7th century onwards, as the Byzantines and neighbouring Sasanid Persians were severely weakened due to the protracted, centuries-lasting and frequent Byzantine–Sasanian wars, the Muslim Arabs began to make inroads into historically Roman territory, taking the Levant and North Africa and making inroads into Asia Minor.
In the mid-7th century, following the Muslim conquest of Persia, Islam penetrated into the Caucasus region.
Over the next centuries Muslim forces took Cyprus, Malta, Crete, Sicily, and parts of southern Italy.
Between 711 and 720, most of the lands of the Visigothic Kingdom of Iberia were brought under Muslim rule—save for small areas in the northwest (Asturias) and largely Basque regions in the Pyrenees.
This territory, under the Arabic name Al-Andalus, became part of the expanding Umayyad Caliphate.
The unsuccessful second siege of Constantinople (717) weakened the Umayyad dynasty and reduced their prestige.
The Umayyads were then defeated by the Frankish leader Charles Martel at the Battle of Poitiers in 732, which ended their northward advance.
In the remote regions of north-western Iberia and the middle Pyrenees the power of the Muslims in the south was scarcely felt.
It was here that the foundations of the Christian kingdoms of Asturias, Leon, and Galicia were laid and from where the reconquest of the Iberian Peninsula would start.
However, no coordinated attempt would be made to drive the Moors out.
The Christian kingdoms were mainly focused on their own internal power struggles.
As a result, the Reconquista took the greater part of eight hundred years, in which period a long list of Alfonsos, Sanchos, Ordoños, Ramiros, Fernandos, and Bermudos would be fighting their Christian rivals as much as the Muslim invaders.
During the Dark Ages, the Western Roman Empire fell under the control of various tribes.
The Germanic and Slav tribes established their domains over Western and Eastern Europe, respectively.
Eventually the Frankish tribes were united under Clovis I.
Charlemagne, a Frankish king of the Carolingian dynasty who had conquered most of Western Europe, was anointed "Holy Roman Emperor" by the Pope in 800.
This led to the founding of the Holy Roman Empire in 962, which eventually became centred on the German principalities of central Europe.
East Central Europe saw the creation of the first Slavic states and the adoption of Christianity (c.
The powerful West Slavic state of Great Moravia spread its territory all the way south to the Balkans, reaching its largest territorial extent under Svatopluk I and causing a series of armed conflicts with East Francia.
Further south, the first South Slavic states emerged in the late 7th and 8th century and adopted Christianity: the First Bulgarian Empire, the Serbian Principality (later Kingdom and Empire), and the Duchy of Croatia (later Kingdom of Croatia).
To the east, Kievan Rus' expanded from its capital in Kiev to become the largest state in Europe by the 10th century.
In 988, Vladimir the Great adopted Orthodox Christianity as the religion of state.
Further east, Volga Bulgaria became an Islamic state in the 10th century, but was eventually absorbed into Russia several centuries later.
The period between the year 1000 and 1250 is known as the High Middle Ages, followed by the Late Middle Ages until c.
During the High Middle Ages the population of Europe experienced significant growth, culminating in the Renaissance of the 12th century.
Economic growth, together with the lack of safety on the mainland trading routes, made possible the development of major commercial routes along the coast of the Mediterranean and Baltic Seas.
The growing wealth and independence acquired by some coastal cities gave the Maritime Republics a leading role in the European scene.
The Middle Ages on the mainland were dominated by the two upper echelons of the social structure: the nobility and the clergy.
Feudalism developed in France in the Early Middle Ages, and soon spread throughout Europe.
A struggle for influence between the nobility and the monarchy in England led to the writing of Magna Carta and the establishment of a parliament.
The primary source of culture in this period came from the Roman Catholic Church.
Through monasteries and cathedral schools, the Church was responsible for education in much of Europe.
The Papacy reached the height of its power during the High Middle Ages.
An East-West Schism in 1054 split the former Roman Empire religiously, with the Eastern Orthodox Church in the Byzantine Empire and the Roman Catholic Church in the former Western Roman Empire.
In 1095 Pope Urban II called for a crusade against Muslims occupying Jerusalem and the Holy Land.
In Europe itself, the Church organised the Inquisition against heretics.
In the Iberian Peninsula, the Reconquista concluded with the fall of Granada in 1492, ending over seven centuries of Islamic rule in the south-western peninsula.
In the east, a resurgent Byzantine Empire recaptured Crete and Cyprus from the Muslims, and reconquered the Balkans.
Constantinople was the largest and wealthiest city in Europe from the 9th to the 12th centuries, with a population of approximately 400,000.
The Empire was weakened following the defeat at Manzikert, and was weakened considerably by the sack of Constantinople in 1204, during the Fourth Crusade.
Although it would recover Constantinople in 1261, Byzantium fell in 1453 when Constantinople was taken by the Ottoman Empire.
In the 11th and 12th centuries, constant incursions by nomadic Turkic tribes, such as the Pechenegs and the Cuman-Kipchaks, caused a massive migration of Slavic populations to the safer, heavily forested regions of the north, and temporarily halted the expansion of the Rus' state to the south and east.
Like many other parts of Eurasia, these territories were overrun by the Mongols.
The invaders, who became known as Tatars, were mostly Turkic-speaking peoples under Mongol suzerainty.
They established the state of the Golden Horde with headquarters in Crimea, which later adopted Islam as a religion, and ruled over modern-day southern and central Russia for more than three centuries.
After the collapse of Mongol dominions, the first Romanian states (principalities) emerged in the 14th century: Moldavia and Walachia.
Previously, these territories were under the successive control of Pechenegs and Cumans.
From the 12th to the 15th centuries, the Grand Duchy of Moscow grew from a small principality under Mongol rule to the largest state in Europe, overthrowing the Mongols in 1480, and eventually becoming the Tsardom of Russia.
The state was consolidated under Ivan III the Great and Ivan the Terrible, steadily expanding to the east and south over the next centuries.
The Great Famine of 1315–1317 was the first crisis that would strike Europe in the late Middle Ages.
The period between 1348 and 1420 witnessed the heaviest loss.
The population of France was reduced by half.
Medieval Britain was afflicted by 95 famines, and France suffered the effects of 75 or more in the same period.
Europe was devastated in the mid-14th century by the Black Death, one of the most deadly pandemics in human history which killed an estimated 25 million people in Europe alone—a third of the European population at the time.
The plague had a devastating effect on Europe's social structure; it induced people to live for the moment as illustrated by Giovanni Boccaccio in The Decameron (1353).
It was a serious blow to the Roman Catholic Church and led to increased persecution of Jews, beggars and lepers.
The plague is thought to have returned every generation with varying virulence and mortalities until the 18th century.
During this period, more than 100 plague epidemics swept across Europe.
The Renaissance was a period of cultural change originating in Florence, and later spreading to the rest of Europe.
The rise of a new humanism was accompanied by the recovery of forgotten classical Greek and Arabic knowledge from monastic libraries, often translated from Arabic into Latin.
The Renaissance spread across Europe between the 14th and 16th centuries: it saw the flowering of art, philosophy, music, and the sciences, under the joint patronage of royalty, the nobility, the Catholic Church and an emerging merchant class.
Patrons in Italy, including the Medici family of Florentine bankers and the popes in Rome, funded prolific quattrocento and cinquecento artists such as Raphael, Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci.
Political intrigue within the Church in the mid-14th century caused the Western Schism.
During this 40-year period, two popes—one in Avignon and one in Rome—claimed rulership over the Church.
Although the schism was eventually healed in 1417, the papacy's spiritual authority had suffered greatly.
In the 15th century, Europe started to extend itself beyond its geographic frontiers.
Spain and Portugal, the greatest naval powers of the time, took the lead in exploring the world.
Exploration reached the Southern Hemisphere in the Atlantic and the southern tip of Africa.
Christopher Columbus reached the New World in 1492, and Vasco da Gama opened the ocean route to the East, linking the Atlantic and Indian Oceans in 1498.
The Portuguese-born explorer Ferdinand Magellan reached Asia westward across the Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans in a Spanish expedition, resulting in the first circumnavigation of the globe, completed by the Spaniard Juan Sebastián Elcano (1519–1522).
Soon after, the Spanish and Portuguese began establishing large global empires in the Americas, Asia, Africa and Oceania.
France, the Netherlands and England soon followed in building large colonial empires with vast holdings in Africa, the Americas and Asia.
In 1588, the Spanish Armada failed to invade England.
A year later, England tried unsuccessfully to invade Spain, allowing Philip II of Spain to maintain his dominant war capacity in Europe.
This English disaster also allowed the Spanish fleet to retain its capability to wage war for the next decades.
However, two more Spanish armadas failed to invade England (2nd Spanish Armada and 3rd Spanish Armada).
The Church's power was further weakened by the Reformation, which began in 1517 when German theologian Martin Luther nailed his Ninety-five Theses criticising the selling of indulgences to the church door.
He was subsequently excommunicated in the papal bull Exsurge Domine in 1520 and his followers were condemned in the 1521 Diet of Worms, which divided German princes between Protestant and Catholic faiths.
Religious fighting and warfare spread with Protestantism.
The plunder of the empires of the Americas allowed Spain to finance religious persecution in Europe for over a century.
The Thirty Years' War (1618–1648) crippled the Holy Roman Empire and devastated much of Germany, killing between 25 and 40 percent of its population.
In the aftermath of the Peace of Westphalia, France rose to predominance within Europe.
The defeat of the Ottoman Turks at the Battle of Vienna in 1683 marked the historic end of Ottoman expansion into Europe.
In much of Central and Eastern Europe, the 17th century was a period of general decline; the region experienced more than 150 famines in a 200-year period between 1501 and 1700.
From the Union of Krewo (1385) east-central Europe was dominated by the Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.
The hegemony of the vast Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth had ended with the devastation brought by the Northern War of 1655–1660 (Deluge) and subsequent conflicts; the state itself was partitioned and ceased to exist at the end of the 18th century.
From the 15th to 18th centuries, when the disintegrating khanates of the Golden Horde were conquered by Russia, Tatars from the Crimean Khanate frequently raided Eastern Slavic lands to capture slaves.
Further east, the Nogai Horde and Kazakh Khanate frequently raided the Slavic-speaking areas of contemporary Russia and Ukraine for hundreds of years, until the Russian expansion and conquest of most of northern Eurasia (i.
Eastern Europe, Central Asia and Siberia).
The Renaissance and the New Monarchs marked the start of an Age of Discovery, a period of exploration, invention and scientific development.
Important figures of the Scientific Revolution during the 16th and 17th centuries included Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo, and Isaac Newton.
According to Peter Barrett, "It is widely accepted that 'modern science' arose in the Europe of the 17th century (towards the end of the Renaissance), introducing a new understanding of the natural world.
The Seven Years' War brought to an end the "Old System" of alliances in Europe.
Consequently, when the American Revolutionary War turned into a global war between 1778 and 1783, Britain found itself opposed by a strong coalition of European powers, and lacking any substantial ally.
The Age of Enlightenment was a powerful intellectual movement during the 18th century promoting scientific and reason-based thoughts.
Discontent with the aristocracy and clergy's monopoly on political power in France resulted in the French Revolution, and the establishment of the First Republic as a result of which the monarchy and many of the nobility perished during the initial reign of terror.
Napoleon Bonaparte rose to power in the aftermath of the French Revolution, and established the First French Empire that, during the Napoleonic Wars, grew to encompass large parts of Europe before collapsing in 1815 with the Battle of Waterloo.
Napoleonic rule resulted in the further dissemination of the ideals of the French Revolution, including that of the nation state, as well as the widespread adoption of the French models of administration, law and education.
The Congress of Vienna, convened after Napoleon's downfall, established a new balance of power in Europe centred on the five "great powers": the UK, France, Prussia, Austria, and Russia.
This balance would remain in place until the Revolutions of 1848, during which liberal uprisings affected all of Europe except for Russia and the UK.
These revolutions were eventually put down by conservative elements and few reforms resulted.
The year 1859 saw the unification of Romania, as a nation state, from smaller principalities.
In 1867, the Austro-Hungarian empire was formed; 1871 saw the unifications of both Italy and Germany as nation-states from smaller principalities.
In parallel, the Eastern Question grew more complex ever since the Ottoman defeat in the Russo-Turkish War (1768–1774).
As the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire seemed imminent, the Great Powers struggled to safeguard their strategic and commercial interests in the Ottoman domains.
The Russian Empire stood to benefit from the decline, whereas the Habsburg Empire and Britain perceived the preservation of the Ottoman Empire to be in their best interests.
Meanwhile, the Serbian Revolution (1804) and Greek War of Independence (1821) marked the beginning of the end of Ottoman rule in the Balkans, which ended with the Balkan Wars in 1912–1913.
Formal recognition of the de facto independent principalities of Montenegro, Serbia and Romania ensued at the Congress of Berlin in 1878.
The Industrial Revolution began in Great Britain in the last part of the 18th century and spread throughout Europe.
The invention and implementation of new technologies resulted in rapid urban growth, mass employment and the rise of a new working class.
Reforms in social and economic spheres followed, including the first laws on child labour, the legalisation of trade unions, and the abolition of slavery.
In Britain, the Public Health Act 1875 was passed, which significantly improved living conditions in many British cities.
Europe's population increased from about 100 million in 1700 to 400 million by 1900.
The last major famine recorded in Western Europe, the Great Famine of Ireland, caused death and mass emigration of millions of Irish people.
In the 19th century, 70 million people left Europe in migrations to various European colonies abroad and to the United States.
The industrial revolution also led to large population growth, and the share of the world population living in Europe reached a peak of slightly above 25% around the year 1913.
Two world wars and an economic depression dominated the first half of the 20th century.
The First World War was fought between 1914 and 1918.
It started when Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria was assassinated by the Yugoslav nationalist Gavrilo Princip.
Most European nations were drawn into the war, which was fought between the Entente Powers (France, Belgium, Serbia, Portugal, Russia, the United Kingdom, and later Italy, Greece, Romania, and the United States) and the Central Powers (Austria-Hungary, Germany, Bulgaria, and the Ottoman Empire).
The war left more than 16 million civilians and military dead.
Over 60 million European soldiers were mobilised from 1914 to 1918.
Russia was plunged into the Russian Revolution, which threw down the Tsarist monarchy and replaced it with the communist Soviet Union, leading also to the independence of many former Russian governorates, such as Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, as new European countries.
Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire collapsed and broke up into separate nations, and many other nations had their borders redrawn.
The Treaty of Versailles, which officially ended the First World War in 1919, was harsh towards Germany, upon whom it placed full responsibility for the war and imposed heavy sanctions.
Excess deaths in Russia over the course of the First World War and the Russian Civil War (including the postwar famine) amounted to a combined total of 18 million.
In 1932–1933, under Stalin's leadership, confiscations of grain by the Soviet authorities contributed to the second Soviet famine which caused millions of deaths; surviving kulaks were persecuted and many sent to Gulags to do forced labour.
Stalin was also responsible for the Great Purge of 1937–38 in which the NKVD executed 681,692 people; millions of people were deported and exiled to remote areas of the Soviet Union.
The social revolutions sweeping through Russia also affected other European nations following The Great War: in 1919, with the Weimar Republic in Germany and the First Austrian Republic; in 1922, with Mussolini's one-party fascist government in the Kingdom of Italy and in Atatürk's Turkish Republic, adopting the Western alphabet and state secularism.
Economic instability, caused in part by debts incurred in the First World War and 'loans' to Germany played havoc in Europe in the late 1920s and 1930s.
This, and the Wall Street crash of 1929, brought about the worldwide Great Depression.
Helped by the economic crisis, social instability and the threat of communism, fascist movements developed throughout Europe placing Adolf Hitler in power of what became Nazi Germany.
In 1933, Hitler became the leader of Germany and began to work towards his goal of building Greater Germany.
Germany re-expanded and took back the Saarland and Rhineland in 1935 and 1936.
In 1938, Austria became a part of Germany following the Anschluss.
Following the Munich Agreement signed by Germany, France, the United Kingdom, and Italy, later in 1938 Germany annexed the Sudetenland, which was a part of Czechoslovakia inhabited by ethnic Germans.
In early 1939, the remainder of Czechoslovakia was split into the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, controlled by Germany and the Slovak Republic.
At the time, the United Kingdom and France preferred a policy of appeasement.
With tensions mounting between Germany and Poland over the future of Danzig, the Germans turned to the Soviets and signed the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, which allowed the Soviets to invade the Baltic states and parts of Poland and Romania.
Germany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939, prompting France and the United Kingdom to declare war on Germany on 3 September, opening the European theatre of the Second World War.
The Soviet invasion of Poland started on 17 September and Poland fell soon thereafter.
On 24 September, the Soviet Union attacked the Baltic countries and, on 30 November, Finland, the latter of which was followed by the devastating Winter War for the Red Army.
The British hoped to land at Narvik and send troops to aid Finland, but their primary objective in the landing was to encircle Germany and cut the Germans off from Scandinavian resources.
Around the same time, Germany moved troops into Denmark.
The Phoney War continued.
In May 1940, Germany attacked France through the Low Countries.
France capitulated in June 1940.
By August, Germany had begun a bombing offensive against the United Kingdom but failed to convince the Britons to give up.
In 1941, Germany invaded the Soviet Union in Operation Barbarossa.
On 7 December 1941 Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor drew the United States into the conflict as allies of the British Empire, and other allied forces.
After the staggering Battle of Stalingrad in 1943, the German offensive in the Soviet Union turned into a continual fallback.
The Battle of Kursk, which involved the largest tank battle in history, was the last major German offensive on the Eastern Front.
In June 1944, British and American forces invaded France in the D-Day landings, opening a new front against Germany.
Berlin finally fell in 1945, ending the Second World War in Europe.
The war was the largest and most destructive in human history, with 60 million dead across the world.
More than 40 million people in Europe had died as a result of the Second World War, including between 11 and 17 million people who perished during the Holocaust.
The Soviet Union lost around 27 million people (mostly civilians) during the war, about half of all Second World War casualties.
By the end of the Second World War, Europe had more than 40 million refugees.
Several post-war expulsions in Central and Eastern Europe displaced a total of about 20 million people.
The First World War, and especially the Second World War, diminished the eminence of Western Europe in world affairs.
After the Second World War the map of Europe was redrawn at the Yalta Conference and divided into two blocs, the Western countries and the communist Eastern bloc, separated by what was later called by Winston Churchill an "Iron Curtain".
The United States and Western Europe established the NATO alliance and, later, the Soviet Union and Central Europe established the Warsaw Pact.
Particular hot spots after the Second World War were Berlin and Trieste, whereby the Free Territory of Trieste, founded in 1947 with the UN, was dissolved in 1954 and 1975, respectively.
The Berlin blockade in 1948 and 1949 and the construction of the Berlin Wall in 1961 were one of the great international crises of the Cold War.
The two new superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, became locked in a fifty-year-long Cold War, centred on nuclear proliferation.
At the same time decolonisation, which had already started after the First World War, gradually resulted in the independence of most of the European colonies in Asia and Africa.
In the 1980s the reforms of Mikhail Gorbachev and the Solidarity movement in Poland weakened the previously rigid communist system.
The opening of the Iron Curtain at the Pan-European Picnic then set in motion a peaceful chain reaction, at the end of which the Eastern bloc, the Warsaw Pact and other communist states collapsed, and the Cold War ended.
Germany was reunited, after the symbolic fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and the maps of Central and Eastern Europe were redrawn once more.
This made old previously interrupted cultural and economic relationships possible, and previously isolated cities such as Berlin, Prague, Vienna, Budapest and Trieste were now again in the centre of Europe.
European integration also grew after the Second World War.
In 1949 the Council of Europe was founded, following a speech by Sir Winston Churchill, with the idea of unifying Europe to achieve common goals.
It includes all European states except for Belarus, Russia, and Vatican City.
The Treaty of Rome in 1957 established the European Economic Community between six Western European states with the goal of a unified economic policy and common market.
In 1967 the EEC, European Coal and Steel Community, and Euratom formed the European Community, which in 1993 became the European Union.
The EU established a parliament, a court and a central bank, and introduced the euro as a unified currency.
Between 2004 and 2013, more Central European countries began joining, expanding the EU to 28 European countries and once more making Europe a major economical and political centre of power.
However, the United Kingdom withdrew from the EU on 31 January 2020, as a result of a June 2016 referendum on EU membership.
The Russo-Ukrainian War steeply escalated after the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022, marking the largest humanitarian and refugee crisis in Europe since the Second World War and the Yugoslav Wars.
Europe makes up the western fifth of the Eurasian landmass.
It has a higher ratio of coast to landmass than any other continent or subcontinent.
Its maritime borders consist of the Arctic Ocean to the north, the Atlantic Ocean to the west and the Mediterranean, Black and Caspian Seas to the south.
Land relief in Europe shows great variation within relatively small areas.
The southern regions are more mountainous, while moving north the terrain descends from the high Alps, Pyrenees and Carpathians, through hilly uplands, into broad, low northern plains, which are vast in the east.
This extended lowland is known as the Great European Plain and at its heart lies the North German Plain.
An arc of uplands also exists along the north-western seaboard, which begins in the western parts of the islands of Britain and Ireland, and then continues along the mountainous, fjord-cut spine of Norway.
This description is simplified.
Subregions such as the Iberian Peninsula and the Italian Peninsula contain their own complex features, as does mainland Central Europe itself, where the relief contains many plateaus, river valleys and basins that complicate the general trend.
Sub-regions like Iceland, Britain and Ireland are special cases.
The former is a land unto itself in the northern ocean that is counted as part of Europe, while the latter are upland areas that were once joined to the mainland until rising sea levels cut them off.
The largest European lakes are located in the north of the continent.
The Volga and Danube are the two longest rivers of Europe.
Europe's largest waterfall (by flow rate) are the Rhine Falls on the Rhine.
Europe lies mainly in the temperate climate zone of the northern hemisphere, where the prevailing wind direction is from the west.
The climate is milder in comparison to other areas of the same latitude around the globe due to the influence of the Gulf Stream, an ocean current which carries warm water from the Gulf of Mexico across the Atlantic Ocean to Europe.
The Gulf Stream is nicknamed "Europe's central heating", because it makes Europe's climate warmer and wetter than it would otherwise be.
The Gulf Stream not only carries warm water to Europe's coast but also warms up the prevailing westerly winds that blow across the continent from the Atlantic Ocean.
Therefore, the average temperature throughout the year of Aveiro is 16 °C (61 °F), while it is only 13 °C (55 °F) in New York City which is almost on the same latitude, bordering the same ocean.
Berlin, Germany; Calgary, Canada; and Irkutsk, in far south-eastern Russia, lie on around the same latitude; January temperatures in Berlin average around 8 °C (14 °F) higher than those in Calgary and they are almost 22 °C (40 °F) higher than average temperatures in Irkutsk.
The large water masses of the Mediterranean Sea, which equalise the temperatures on an annual and daily average, are also of particular importance.
The water of the Mediterranean extends from the Sahara to the Alpine arc in its northernmost part of the Adriatic Sea near Trieste.
In general, Europe is not just colder towards the north compared to the south, but it also gets colder from the west towards the east.
The climate is more oceanic in the west and less so in the east.
This can be illustrated by the following table of average temperatures at locations roughly following the 64th, 60th, 55th, 50th, 45th and 40th latitudes.
None of them is located at high altitude; most of them are close to the sea.
The average temperatures for the coldest month, as well as the annual average temperatures, drop from the west to the east.
For instance, Edinburgh is warmer than Belgrade during the coldest month of the year, although Belgrade is around 10° of latitude farther south.
The geological history of Europe traces back to the formation of the Baltic Shield (Fennoscandia) and the Sarmatian craton, both around 2.
Around 440 million years ago Euramerica was formed from Baltica and Laurentia; a further joining with Gondwana then leading to the formation of Pangea.
Around 190 million years ago, Gondwana and Laurasia split apart due to the widening of the Atlantic Ocean.
Finally and very soon afterwards, Laurasia itself split up again, into Laurentia (North America) and the Eurasian continent.
The land connection between the two persisted for a considerable time, via Greenland, leading to interchange of animal species.
From around 50 million years ago, rising and falling sea levels have determined the actual shape of Europe and its connections with continents such as Asia.
Europe's present shape dates to the late Tertiary period about five million years ago.
The geology of Europe is hugely varied and complex and gives rise to the wide variety of landscapes found across the continent, from the Scottish Highlands to the rolling plains of Hungary.
Europe's most significant feature is the dichotomy between highland and mountainous Southern Europe and a vast, partially underwater, northern plain ranging from Ireland in the west to the Ural Mountains in the east.
These two halves are separated by the mountain chains of the Pyrenees and Alps/Carpathians.
The northern plains are delimited in the west by the Scandinavian Mountains and the mountainous parts of the British Isles.
Major shallow water bodies submerging parts of the northern plains are the Celtic Sea, the North Sea, the Baltic Sea complex and Barents Sea.
The northern plain contains the old geological continent of Baltica and so may be regarded geologically as the "main continent", while peripheral highlands and mountainous regions in the south and west constitute fragments from various other geological continents.
Most of the older geology of western Europe existed as part of the ancient microcontinent Avalonia.
Having lived side by side with agricultural peoples for millennia, Europe's animals and plants have been profoundly affected by the presence and activities of humans.
With the exception of Fennoscandia and northern Russia, few areas of untouched wilderness are currently found in Europe, except for various national parks.
The main natural vegetation cover in Europe is mixed forest.
The conditions for growth are very favourable.
In the north, the Gulf Stream and North Atlantic Drift warm the continent.
Southern Europe has a warm but mild climate.
There are frequent summer droughts in this region.
Mountain ridges also affect the conditions.
Some of these, such as the Alps and the Pyrenees, are oriented east–west and allow the wind to carry large masses of water from the ocean in the interior.
Others are oriented south–north (Scandinavian Mountains, Dinarides, Carpathians, Apennines) and because the rain falls primarily on the side of mountains that is oriented towards the sea, forests grow well on this side, while on the other side, the conditions are much less favourable.
Few corners of mainland Europe have not been grazed by livestock at some point in time, and the cutting down of the preagricultural forest habitat caused disruption to the original plant and animal ecosystems.
The area of primary forest in Europe increased at an average annual rate of 191 000 hectare in 1990–2000, 217 000 ha in 2000–2015 and 153 000 ha in 2015–2025.
Possibly 80 to 90 percent of Europe was once covered by forest.
It stretched from the Mediterranean Sea to the Arctic Ocean.
Although over half of Europe's original forests disappeared through the centuries of deforestation, Europe still has over one quarter of its land area as forest, such as the broadleaf and mixed forests, taiga of Scandinavia and Russia, mixed rainforests of the Caucasus and the Cork oak forests in the western Mediterranean.
During recent times, deforestation has been slowed and many trees have been planted.
However, in many cases monoculture plantations of conifers have replaced the original mixed natural forest, because these grow quicker.
The plantations now cover vast areas of land, but offer poorer habitats for many European forest dwelling species which require a mixture of tree species and diverse forest structure.
The amount of natural forest in Western Europe is just 2–3% or less, while in its Western Russia its 5–10%.
The European country with the smallest percentage of forested area is Iceland (1%), while the most forested country is Finland (77%).
In temperate Europe, mixed forest with both broadleaf and coniferous trees dominate.
The most important species in central and western Europe are beech and oak.
In the north, the taiga is a mixed spruce–pine–birch forest; further north within Russia and extreme northern Scandinavia, the taiga gives way to tundra as the Arctic is approached.
In the Mediterranean, many olive trees have been planted, which are very well adapted to its arid climate; Mediterranean Cypress is also widely planted in southern Europe.
The semi-arid Mediterranean region hosts much scrub forest.
A narrow east–west tongue of Eurasian grassland (the steppe) extends westwards from Ukraine and southern Russia and ends in Hungary and traverses into taiga to the north.
Glaciation during the most recent ice age and the presence of humans affected the distribution of European fauna.
As for the animals, in many parts of Europe most large animals and top predator species have been hunted to extinction.
The woolly mammoth was extinct before the end of the Neolithic period.
Today wolves (carnivores) and bears (omnivores) are endangered.
Once they were found in most parts of Europe.
However, deforestation and hunting caused these animals to withdraw further and further.
By the Middle Ages the bears' habitats were limited to more or less inaccessible mountains with sufficient forest cover.
Today, the brown bear lives primarily in the Balkan peninsula, Scandinavia and Russia; a small number also persist in other countries across Europe (Austria, Pyrenees etc.
In addition, polar bears may be found on Svalbard, a Norwegian archipelago far north of Scandinavia.
The wolf, the second-largest predator in Europe after the brown bear, can be found primarily in Central and Eastern Europe and in the Balkans, with a handful of packs in pockets of Western Europe (Scandinavia, Spain, etc.
Other carnivores include the European wildcat, red fox and arctic fox, the golden jackal, different species of martens, the European hedgehog, different species of reptiles (like snakes such as vipers and grass snakes) and amphibians, as well as different birds (owls, hawks and other birds of prey).
Important European herbivores are snails, larvae, fish, different birds and mammals, like rodents, deer and roe deer, boars and living in the mountains, marmots, steinbocks, chamois among others.
A number of insects, such as the small tortoiseshell butterfly, add to the biodiversity.
Sea creatures are also an important part of European flora and fauna.
The sea flora is mainly phytoplankton.
Important animals that live in European seas are zooplankton, molluscs, echinoderms, different crustaceans, squids and octopuses, fish, dolphins and whales.
Biodiversity is protected in Europe through the Council of Europe's Bern Convention, which has also been signed by the European Community as well as non-European states.
The political map of Europe is substantially derived from the re-organisation of Europe following the Napoleonic Wars in 1815.
The prevalent form of government in Europe is parliamentary democracy, in most cases in the form of republic; in 1815, the prevalent form of government was still the monarchy.
Europe's remaining eleven monarchies are constitutional.
European integration is the process of political, legal, economic (and in some cases social and cultural) integration of European states as it has been pursued by the powers sponsoring the Council of Europe since the end of the Second World War.
The European Union has been the focus of economic integration on the continent since its foundation in 1993.
More recently, the Eurasian Economic Union has been established as a counterpart comprising former Soviet states.
Among the smaller European organisations are the Nordic Council, the Benelux, the Baltic Assembly, and the Visegrád Group.
The least democratic countries in Europe were Belarus, Russia and Turkey in 2025 according to the V-Dem Democracy indices.
This list includes all internationally recognised sovereign countries falling even partially under any common geographical or political definitions of Europe.
Within the above-mentioned states are several de facto independent countries with limited to no international recognition.
Several dependencies and similar territories with broad autonomy are also found within or close to Europe.
This includes Åland (an autonomous county of Finland), two autonomous territories of the Kingdom of Denmark (other than Denmark proper), three Crown Dependencies and two British Overseas Territories.
Svalbard is also included due to its unique status within Norway, although it is not autonomous.
Not included are the three countries of the United Kingdom with devolved powers and the two Autonomous Regions of Portugal, which despite having a unique degree of autonomy, are not largely self-governing in matters other than international affairs.
Areas with little more than a unique tax status, such as the Canary Islands and Heligoland, are also not included for this reason.
As a continent, the economy of Europe is currently the largest on Earth and it is the richest region as measured by assets under management with over $32.
In 2009 Europe remained the wealthiest region.
It was one of several regions where wealth surpassed its precrisis year-end peak.
As with other continents, Europe has a large wealth gap among its countries.
The richer states tend to be in the Northwest and West in general, followed by Central Europe, while most economies of Eastern and Southeastern Europe are still reemerging from the collapse of the Soviet Union and the breakup of Yugoslavia.
The model of the Blue Banana was designed as an economic geographic representation of the respective economic power of the regions, which was further developed into the Golden Banana or Blue Star.
The trade between East and West, as well as towards Asia, which had been disrupted for a long time by the two world wars, new borders and the Cold War, increased sharply after 1989.
In addition, there is new impetus from the Chinese Belt and Road Initiative across the Suez Canal towards Africa and Asia.
The European Union, a political entity composed of 27 European states, comprises the largest single economic area in the world.
Nineteen EU countries share the euro as a common currency.
Four European countries rank in the top ten of the world's largest national economies in GDP (PPP).
This includes (ranks according to the IMF): Russia (4), Germany (6), France (9) and the United Kingdom (10).
Some European countries are much richer than others.
The richest in terms of nominal GDP is Monaco with its US$185,829 per capita (2018) and the poorest is Ukraine with its US$3,659 per capita (2019).
As a whole, Europe's GDP per capita is US$21,767 according to a 2016 International Monetary Fund assessment.
Capitalism has been dominant in the Western world since the end of feudalism.
From Britain, it gradually spread throughout Europe.
The Industrial Revolution started in Europe, specifically the United Kingdom in the late 18th century, and the 19th century saw Western Europe industrialise.
Economies were disrupted by the First World War, but by the beginning of the Second World War, they had recovered and were having to compete with the growing economic strength of the United States.
The Second World War, again, damaged much of Europe's industries.
After the Second World War the economy of the UK was in a state of ruin, and continued to suffer relative economic decline in the following decades.
Italy was also in a poor economic condition but regained a high level of growth by the 1950s.
West Germany recovered quickly and had doubled production from pre-war levels by the 1950s.
France also staged a remarkable comeback enjoying rapid growth and modernisation; later on Spain, under the leadership of Franco, also recovered and the nation recorded huge unprecedented economic growth beginning in the 1960s in what is called the Spanish miracle.
The majority of Central and Eastern European states came under the control of the Soviet Union and thus were members of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (COMECON).
The states which retained a free-market system were given a large amount of aid by the United States under the Marshall Plan.
The western states moved to link their economies together, providing the basis for the EU and increasing cross border trade.
This helped them to enjoy rapidly improving economies, while those states in COMECON were struggling in a large part due to the cost of the Cold War.
Until 1990, the European Community was expanded from 6 founding members to 12.
The emphasis placed on resurrecting the West German economy led to it overtaking the UK as Europe's largest economy.
With the fall of communism in Central and Eastern Europe in 1991, the post-socialist states underwent shock therapy measures to liberalise their economies and implement free market reforms.
After East and West Germany were reunited in 1990, the economy of West Germany struggled as it had to support and largely rebuild the infrastructure of East Germany, while the latter experienced sudden mass unemployment and plummeting of industrial production.
By the millennium change, the EU dominated the economy of Europe, comprising the five largest European economies of the time: Germany, the United Kingdom, France, Italy, and Spain.
In 1999, 12 of the 15 members of the EU joined the Eurozone, replacing their national currencies by the euro.
Figures released by Eurostat in 2009 confirmed that the Eurozone had gone into recession in 2008.
It affected much of the region.
The Euro area crisis especially affected Greece, Ireland, Spain and Portugal.
As a result, measures were taken, especially for Greece, by the leading countries of the Eurozone.
The European Union unemployment rate was 10.
For those aged 15–24 it was 22.
The population of Europe was about 742 million in 2023 according to UN estimates.
This is slightly more than one ninth of the world's population.
The population density of Europe (the number of people per area) is the second highest of any continent, behind Asia.
The population of Europe is currently slowly decreasing, by about 0.
This natural decrease in population is reduced by the fact that more people migrate to Europe from other continents than vice versa.
Southern Europe and Western Europe are the regions with the highest average number of elderly people in the world.
In 2021, the percentage of people over 65 years old was 21% in Western Europe and Southern Europe, compared to 19% in all of Europe and 10% in the world.
Projections suggest that by 2050 Europe will reach 30%.
This is caused by the fact that the population has been having children below replacement level since the 1970s.
The United Nations predicts that Europe will decline in population between 2022 and 2050 by −7 per cent, without changing immigration movements.
According to a population projection of the UN Population Division, Europe's population may fall to between 680 and 720 million people by 2050, which would be 7% of the world population at that time.
Within this context, significant disparities exist between regions in relation to fertility rates.
The average number of children per female of child-bearing age is 1.
The UN predicts a steady population decline in Central and Eastern Europe as a result of emigration and low birth rates.
Pan and Pfeil (2004) count 87 distinct "peoples of Europe", of which 33 form the majority population in at least one sovereign state, while the remaining 54 constitute ethnic minorities.
Romani people are the largest ethnic minority in Europe, according to European Commission.
Europe is home to the highest number of migrants of all global regions at nearly 87 million people in 2020, according to the International Organization for Migration.
In 2005, the EU had an overall net gain from immigration of 1.
This accounted for almost 85% of Europe's total population growth.
In 2021, 827,000 persons were given citizenship of an EU member state, an increase of about 14% compared with 2020.
Early modern emigration from Europe began with Spanish and Portuguese settlers in the 16th century, and French and English settlers in the 17th century.
But numbers remained relatively small until waves of mass emigration in the 19th century, when millions of poor families left Europe.
Today, large populations of European descent are found on every continent.
European ancestry predominates in North America and to a lesser degree in South America (particularly in Uruguay, Argentina, Chile and Brazil, while most of the other Latin American countries also have a considerable population of European origins).
Australia and New Zealand have large European-derived populations.
Africa has no countries with European-derived majorities (or with the exception of Cape Verde and probably São Tomé and Príncipe, depending on context), but there are significant minorities, such as the White South Africans in South Africa.
In Asia, European-derived populations, specifically Russians, predominate in North Asia and some parts of Northern Kazakhstan.
Also in Asia, Europeans, especially the Spanish are an influential minority population in the Philippines.
Europe has about 225 indigenous languages, mostly falling within three Indo-European language groups: the Romance languages, derived from the Latin of the Roman Empire; the Germanic languages, whose ancestor language came from southern Scandinavia; and the Slavic languages.
Slavic languages are mostly spoken in Southern, Central and Eastern Europe.
Romance languages are spoken primarily in Western and Southern Europe, as well as in Switzerland in Central Europe and Romania and Moldova in Eastern Europe.
Germanic languages are spoken in Western, Northern and Central Europe as well as in Gibraltar and Malta in Southern Europe.
Languages in adjacent areas show significant overlaps (such as in English, for example).
Other Indo-European languages outside the three main groups include the Baltic group (Latvian and Lithuanian), the Celtic group (Irish, Scottish Gaelic, Manx, Welsh, Cornish and Breton), Greek, Armenian and Albanian.
A distinct non-Indo-European family of Uralic languages (Estonian, Finnish, Hungarian, Erzya, Komi, Mari, Moksha and Udmurt) is spoken mainly in Estonia, Finland, Hungary and parts of Russia.
Turkic languages include Azerbaijani, Kazakh and Turkish, in addition to smaller languages in Eastern and Southeast Europe (Balkan Gagauz Turkish, Bashkir, Chuvash, Crimean Tatar, Karachay-Balkar, Kumyk, Nogai and Tatar).
Kartvelian languages (Georgian, Mingrelian and Svan) are spoken primarily in Georgia.
Two other language families reside in the North Caucasus (termed Northeast Caucasian, most notably including Chechen, Avar and Lezgin; and Northwest Caucasian, most notably including Adyghe).
Maltese is the only Semitic language that is official within the EU, while Basque is the only European language isolate.
Multilingualism and the protection of regional and minority languages are recognised political goals in Europe today.
The Council of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the Council of Europe's European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages set up a legal framework for language rights in Europe.
Romani is spoken throughout Europe by the Roma minority.
The largest religion in Europe is Christianity, with 76.
Among Protestants, the most popular are Lutheranism, Anglicanism and the Reformed faith.
Smaller Protestant denominations include Anabaptists as well as denominations centred in the United States such as Pentecostalism, Methodism, and Evangelicalism.
Although Christianity originated in the Middle East, its centre of mass shifted to Europe when it became the official religion of the Roman Empire in the late 4th century.
Christianity played a prominent role in the development of the European culture and identity.
Today, just over 25% of the world's Christians live in Europe.
Islam is the second most popular religion in Europe.
Over 25 million, or roughly 5% of the population, adhere to it.
In Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina, two countries in the Balkan peninsula in Southeastern Europe, Islam instead of Christianity is the majority religion.
This is also the case in Turkey and in certain parts of Russia, as well as in Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan, all of which are at the border to Asia.
Many countries in Europe are home to a sizeable Muslim minority, and immigration to Europe has increased the number of Muslim people in Europe in recent years.
The Jewish population in Europe was about 1.
There is a long history of Jewish life in Europe, beginning in antiquity.
During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the Russian Empire had the majority of the world's Jews living within its borders.
In 1897, according to Russian census of 1897, the total Jewish population of Russia was 5.
Of this total, the vast majority lived within the Pale of Settlement.
In 1933, there were about 9.
In the 21st century, France has the largest Jewish population in Europe, followed by the United Kingdom, Germany and Russia.
Other religions practiced in Europe include Hinduism and Buddhism, which are minority religions, except in Russia's Republic of Kalmykia, where Tibetan Buddhism is the majority religion.
A large and increasing number of people in Europe are irreligious, atheist and agnostic.
They are estimated to make up about 18.
The three largest urban areas of Europe are Moscow, London and Paris.
All have over 10 million residents, and as such have been described as megacities.
While Istanbul has the highest total city population, it lies partly in Asia.
The next largest cities in order of population are Madrid, Saint Petersburg, Milan, Barcelona, Berlin, and Rome each having over three million residents.
When considering the commuter belts or metropolitan areas within Europe (for which comparable data is available), Moscow covers the largest population, followed in order by Istanbul, London, Paris, Madrid, Milan, Ruhr Area, Saint Petersburg, Rhein-Süd, Barcelona and Berlin.
The boundaries of Europe were historically understood as those of Christendom (or more specifically Latin Christendom), as established or defended throughout the medieval and early modern history of Europe, especially against Islam, as in the Reconquista and the Ottoman wars in Europe.
This shared cultural heritage is combined by overlapping indigenous national cultures and folklores, roughly divided into Slavic, Latin (Romance) and Germanic, but with several components not part of either of these groups (notably Greek, Basque and Celtic).
Historically, special examples with overlapping cultures are Strasbourg with Latin (Romance) and Germanic, or Trieste with Latin, Slavic and Germanic roots.
Cultural contacts and mixtures shape a large part of the regional cultures of Europe.
Europe is often described as "maximum cultural diversity with minimal geographical distances".
Different cultural events are organised in Europe, with the aim of bringing different cultures closer together and raising awareness of their importance, such as the European Capital of Culture, the European Region of Gastronomy, the European Youth Capital and the European Capital of Sport.
Sport in Europe tends to be highly organised with many sports having professional leagues.
The origins of many of the world's most popular sports today lie in the codification of many traditional games, especially in the United Kingdom.
However, a paradoxical feature of European sport is the extent to which local, regional and national variations continue to exist, and even in some instances to predominate.
In Europe, many people are unable to access basic social conditions, which makes it harder for them to thrive and flourish.
Access to basic necessities can be compromised, for example 10% of Europeans spend at least 40% of household income on housing.
From the 1980s income inequality has been rising and wage shares have been falling.
In 2016, the richest 20% of households earned over five times more than the poorest 20%.
Many workers experience stagnant real wages and precarious work is common even for essential workers.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY 4.
Text taken from Global Forest Resources Assessment 2025​, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
Catholicism & Orthodox Christianity.
ISBN 978-1-60413-106-2.
Bulliet, Richard; Crossley, Pamela; Headrick, Daniel; Hirsch, Steven; Johnson, Lyman (2011).
The Earth and Its Peoples, Brief Edition.
ISBN 978-0-495-91311-5.
The Byzantine Economy.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-84978-4.
The Myth of Continents: A Critique of Metageography.
University of California Press.
ISBN 978-0-520-20743-1.
National Geographic Society (2005).
National Geographic Visual History of the World.
Washington, DC: National Geographic Society.
Pounds, Norman John Greville (1979).
An Historical Geography of Europe, 1500–1840.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-22379-9.
Encyclopædia Britannica.
North America is a continent in the Northern and Western hemispheres.
It is bordered to the north by the Arctic Ocean, to the east by the Atlantic Ocean, to the southeast by South America and the Caribbean Sea, and to the south and west by the Pacific Ocean.
North America covers an area of around 24,709,000 square kilometers (9,540,000 square miles), representing approximately 16.
It is the third-largest continent by size after Asia and Africa, and the fourth-largest continent by population after Asia, Africa, and Europe.
As of 2021, North America's population is estimated at over 592 million people in 23 independent states and territories, or about 7.
The continent includes the subregions of Northern America (comprising Canada, Greenland, and the continental United States as well as the insular territories of Bermuda and Saint Pierre and Miquelon) and Middle America (comprising Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean).
In human geography, the terms "North America" and "North American" often refer to just Northern America.
It is unknown exactly how and when the first human populations reached North America.
People are known to have lived in the Americas at least 20,000 years ago, but various evidence points to possibly earlier dates.
The Paleo-Indian period in North America followed the Last Glacial Period, and lasted until about 10,000 years ago when the Archaic period began.
The classic stage followed the Archaic period, and lasted from approximately the 6th to 13th centuries.
Norse exploration and colonization began in the late 10th century; the Norse built several settlements in Greenland and at least one settlement in Newfoundland.
Beginning in 1492, the voyages of Christopher Columbus led to a transatlantic exchange, including migrations of European settlers during the Age of Discovery and the early modern period.
Present-day cultural and ethnic patterns reflect interactions between early European colonists, indigenous peoples, enslaved Africans, later immigrants from Europe and Asia, and descendants of these respective groups.
European colonization has led to most North Americans speaking European languages (such as English, Spanish, and French) and the cultures of the region commonly reflect Western traditions.
However, there remain significant indigenous populations that continue to adhere to their respective pre-colonial cultural and linguistic traditions.
The Americas were named after the Italian explorer Amerigo Vespucci by German cartographers Martin Waldseemüller and Matthias Ringmann.
Vespucci explored South America between 1497 and 1502, and was the first European to suggest that the Americas represented a landmass then unknown to the Europeans.
In 1507, Waldseemüller published a world map, and placed the word "America" on the continent of present-day South America.
The continent north of present-day Mexico was then referred to as Parias.
On a 1553 world map published by Petrus Apianus, North America was called "Baccalearum", meaning "realm of the Cod fish", in reference to the abundance of cod on the East Coast.
Waldseemüller used the Latinized version of Vespucci's name, Americus Vespucius, in its feminine form of "America", following the examples of "Europa", "Asia", and "Africa".
Americus originated from Medieval Latin Emericus (see Saint Emeric of Hungary), coming from the Old High German name Emmerich.
Map makers later extended the name America to North America.
In 1538, Gerardus Mercator used the term America on his world map of the entire Western Hemisphere.
On his subsequent 1569 map, Mercator called North America "America or New India" (America sive India Nova).
The Spanish Empire called its territories in North and South America "Las Indias", and the name given to the state body that oversaw the region was called the Council of the Indies.
The United Nations and its statistics division recognize North America as comprising three subregions: Northern America, Central America (which includes Mexico), and the Caribbean.
In the limited context of regional trade agreements such as NAFTA, the term is used to reference three countries: Canada, Mexico, and the United States.
According to the six-continent model, which is prevalent in Latin America and across the Romance-speaking world as well as in Greece, "North America" designates a subregion comprising Canada, Mexico, Saint Pierre and Miquelon, and the United States; and often Bermuda, Clipperton Island, and Greenland.
North America has historically been known by other names, including Spanish North America, New Spain, New France, British North America and América Septentrional, the first official name given to Mexico.
North America includes several regions and subregions, each of which have their own respective cultural, economic, and geographic regions.
Economic regions include several regions formalized in 20th- and 21st-century trade agreements, including NAFTA between Canada, Mexico, and the United States, and CAFTA between Central America, the Dominican Republic, and the United States.
North America is divided linguistically and culturally into two primary regions, Anglo-America and Latin America.
Anglo-America includes most of North America, Belize, and Caribbean islands with English-speaking populations.
There are also regions, including Louisiana and Quebec, with large Francophone populations; in Quebec and Saint Pierre and Miquelon, French is the official language.
The southern portion of North America includes Central America and non-English-speaking Caribbean nations.
The north of the continent maintains recognized regions as well.
In contrast to the common definition of North America, which encompasses the whole North American continent, the term "North America" is sometimes used more narrowly to refer only to four nations, Canada, Greenland, Mexico, and the U.
Census Bureau includes Saint Pierre and Miquelon, but excludes Mexico from its definition.
The term Northern America refers to the northernmost countries and territories of North America: the U.
Although the term does not refer to a unified region, Middle America includes Mexico, Central America, and the Caribbean.
North America's largest countries by land area are Canada and the U.
In Canada, these include (from east to west) Atlantic Canada, Central Canada, the Canadian Prairies, the British Columbia Coast, Western Canada, and Northern Canada.
The Great Lakes region and the Pacific Northwest include areas in both the U.
The indigenous peoples of the Americas have many creation myths, some of which assert that they have been present on the land since its creation, but there is no evidence that humans evolved there.
The specifics of the initial settlement of the Americas by ancient Asians are subject to ongoing research and discussion.
The traditional theory has been that hunters entered the Bering Land Bridge between eastern Siberia and present-day Alaska from 27,000 to 14,000 years ago.
A growing viewpoint is that the first American inhabitants sailed from Beringia some 13,000 years ago, with widespread habitation of the Americas during the end of the Last Glacial Period, in what is known as the Late Glacial Maximum, around 12,500 years ago.
The oldest petroglyphs in North America date from 15,000 to 10,000 years before present.
Genetic research and anthropology indicate additional waves of migration from Asia via the Bering Strait during the Early-Middle Holocene.
Prior to the arrival of European explorers and colonists in North America, the natives of North America were divided into many different polities, ranging from small bands of a few families to large empires.
They lived in several culture areas, which roughly correspond to geographic and biological zones that defined the representative cultures and lifestyles of the indigenous people who lived there, including the bison hunters of the Great Plains and the farmers of Mesoamerica.
Native groups also are classified by their language families, which included Athabaskan and Uto-Aztecan languages.
Indigenous peoples with similar languages did not always share the same material culture, however, and were not necessarily always allies.
Anthropologists speculate that the Inuit of the high Arctic arrived in North America much later than other native groups, evidenced by the disappearance of Dorset culture artifacts from the archaeological record and their replacement by the Thule people.
During the thousands of years of native habitation on the continent, cultures changed and shifted.
One of the oldest yet discovered is the Clovis culture (c.
Following the early Archaic period, major regional developments included the Mississippian culture (spanning the Mississippi River valley with platform-mound urban centers) and the Ancestral Puebloans of the Four Corners region.
The more southern cultural groups of North America were responsible for the domestication of many common crops now used around the world, such as tomatoes, squash, and maize.
As a result of the development of agriculture in the south, many other cultural advances were made there.
The Mayans developed a writing system, built huge pyramids and temples, had a complex calendar, and developed the concept of zero around 400 CE.
The first recorded European references to North America are in Norse sagas where it is referred to as Vinland.
The earliest verifiable instance of pre-Columbian trans-oceanic contact by any European culture with the North America mainland has been dated to around 1000 CE.
The site, situated at the northernmost extent of the island named Newfoundland, has provided unmistakable evidence of Norse settlement.
Norse explorer Leif Erikson (c.
Erikson was the first European to make landfall on the continent (excluding Greenland).
The Mayan culture was still present in southern Mexico and Guatemala when the Spanish conquistadors arrived, but political dominance in the area had shifted to the Aztec Empire, whose capital city Tenochtitlan was located further north in the Valley of Mexico.
The Aztecs were conquered in 1521 by Hernán Cortés.
During the so-called Age of Discovery, Europeans explored overseas and staked claims to various parts of North America, much of which was already settled by indigenous peoples.
Upon Europeans' arrival in the "New World", indigenous peoples had a variety of reactions, including curiosity, trading, cooperation, resignation, and resistance.
The indigenous population declined substantially following European arrival, primarily due to the introduction of Eurasian diseases, such as smallpox, to which the indigenous peoples lacked immunity, and because of violent conflicts with Europeans.
Indigenous culture changed significantly and their affiliation with political and cultural groups also changed.
Several linguistic groups died out, and others changed quite quickly.
On North America's southeastern coast, Spanish explorer Juan Ponce de León, who had accompanied Columbus's second voyage, visited and named in 1513 La Florida.
As the colonial period unfolded, Spain, England, and France appropriated and claimed extensive territories on North America's eastern and southern coastlines.
Spain established permanent settlements on the Caribbean islands of Hispaniola and Cuba in the 1490s, building cities, putting the resident indigenous populations to work, raising crops for Spanish settlers and panning gold to enrich the Spaniards.
Much of the indigenous population died due to disease and overwork, spurring the Spaniards on to claim new lands and peoples.
An expedition under the command of Spanish settler, Hernán Cortés, sailed westward in 1519 to what turned out to be the mainland in Mexico.
With local indigenous allies, the Spanish conquered the Aztec empire in central Mexico in 1521.
Spain then established permanent cities in Mexico, Central America, and Spanish South America in the sixteenth century.
Once Spaniards conquered the high civilization of the Aztecs and Incas, the Caribbean was a backwater of the Spanish empire.
Other European powers began to intrude on areas claimed by Spain, including the Caribbean islands.
France took the western half of Hispaniola and developed Saint-Domingue as a cane sugar producing colony worked by black slave labor.
Britain took Barbados and Jamaica, and the Dutch and Danes took islands previously claimed by Spain.
Britain did not begin settling on the North American mainland until a hundred years after the first Spanish settlements, since it sought first to control nearby Ireland.
The first permanent English settlement was in Jamestown, Virginia in 1607, followed by additional colonial establishments on the east coast from present-day Georgia in the south to Massachusetts in the north, forming the Thirteen Colonies of British America.
The English did not establish settlements north or east of the St.
Lawrence Valley in present-day Canada until after the conclusion of the American Revolutionary War.
Britain's early settlements in present-day Canada included St.
John's, Newfoundland in 1630 and Halifax, Nova Scotia in 1749.
The first permanent French settlement was in Quebec City, Quebec, established in 1608.
With the British victory in the Seven Years' War, France in 1763 ceded to Britain its claims of North American territories east of the Mississippi River.
Spain, in turn, gained rights to the territories west of Mississippi, which then served as a border between Spain and Britain's territorial claims.
French colonists settled Illinois Country after several generations of experience on North America, migrating over the Mississippi River to regions where Spain was not present and where they were able to leverage their earlier Louisiana French settlements around the Gulf of Mexico.
These early French settlers partnered with midwest indigenous tribes, and their mixed ancestry descendants later followed a westward expansion all the way to the Pacific Ocean on the present-day U.
In 1776, after various attempts to reconcile differences with the British, the Thirteen Colonies in British America sent delegates to the Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia, who unanimously adopted the Declaration of Independence on 4 July 1776, written primarily by Thomas Jefferson, a member of the Committee of Five charged by the Second Continental Congress with authoring it.
In the Declaration, the thirteen colonies declared their independence from the British monarchy, then governed by King George III, and detailed the factors that contributed to their decision.
With the signing and issuance of the Declaration of Independence, the thirteen colonies formalized and escalated the American Revolutionary War, which had begun the year before at the Battles of Lexington and Concord on 19 April 1775.
Gathered in Philadelphia following the war's outbreak, delegates from the thirteen colonies established the Continental Army from various patriot militias then engaged in resisting the British, and appointed George Washington as the Continental Army's military commander.
As the American Revolutionary War progressed, France and Spain, both then enemies of Britain, began to ultimately see the promise of a potential American victory in the war and began supporting Washington and the American Revolutionary cause.
The British Army, in turn, was supported by Hessian military units from present-day Germany.
In 1783, after an eight-year attempt to defeat the American rebellion, King George III acknowledged Britain's defeat in the war, leading to the signing of the Treaty of Paris on 3 September 1783, which solidified the sovereign establishment of the United States.
By the late 18th century, Russia was established on the Pacific Northwest northern coastline, where it was engaged in maritime fur trade and was supported by various indigenous settlements in the region.
As a result, the Spanish were showing more interest in controlling the trade on the Pacific coast and mapped most of its coastline.
The first Spanish settlements were attempted in Alta California during that period.
Numerous overland explorations associated with voyageurs, fur trade, and U.
In 1803, during the presidency of Thomas Jefferson, the third U.
Mexico fought a lengthy war for independence from Spain, winning it for Mexico (which included Central America at the time) in 1821.
Much of the area was in fact dominated by indigenous peoples, which did not recognize the claims of Spain, France, or the U.
Russia sold its North American claims, which included the present-day U.
In 1867, colonial settlers north of the United States, unified as the dominion of Canada.
After decades of work, the Panama Canal was completed, which connected the Atlantic and Pacific oceans in 1913 and greatly facilitated global shipping navigation.
North America occupies the northern portion of the landmass generally referred to as the New World, the Western Hemisphere, the Americas, or simply America, which, in many countries, is considered a single continent with North America a subcontinent.
North America is the third-largest continent by area after Asia and Africa.
North America's only land connection to South America is in present-day Panama at the Darien Gap on the Colombia–Panama border, placing almost all of Panama within North America.
Alternatively, some geologists physiographically locate its southern limit at the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, Mexico, with Central America extending southeastward to South America from this point.
The Caribbean islands, or West Indies, are considered part of North America.
The continental coastline is long and irregular.
The Gulf of Mexico is the largest body of water indenting the continent, followed by Hudson Bay.
Others include the Gulf of Saint Lawrence and the Gulf of California.
Before the Central American isthmus formed, the region had been underwater.
The islands of the West Indies delineate a submerged former land bridge, which had connected North and South America via what are now Florida and Venezuela.
There are several islands off the continent's coasts; principally, the Arctic Archipelago, the Bahamas, Turks and Caicos, the Greater and Lesser Antilles, the Aleutian Islands (some of which are in the Eastern Hemisphere proper), the Alexander Archipelago, the many thousand islands of the British Columbia Coast, and Newfoundland.
Greenland, a self-governing Danish island, and the world's largest, is on the same tectonic plate (the North American Plate) and is part of North America geographically.
In a geologic sense, Bermuda is not part of the Americas, but an oceanic island that was formed on the fissure of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge over 100 million years ago (mya).
The nearest landmass to it is Cape Hatteras, North Carolina.
However, Bermuda is often thought of as part of North America, especially given its historical, political and cultural ties to Virginia and other parts of the continent.
The vast majority of North America is on the North American Plate.
Parts of western Mexico, including Baja California, and of California, including the cities of San Diego, Los Angeles, and Santa Cruz, lie on the eastern edge of the Pacific Plate, with the two plates meeting along the San Andreas Fault.
The southernmost portion of the continent and much of the West Indies lie on the Caribbean Plate, whereas the Juan de Fuca Plate and Cocos Plate border the North American Plate on its western frontier.
The continent can be divided into four great regions (each of which contains many subregions): the Great Plains stretching from the Gulf of Mexico to the Canadian Arctic; the geologically young, mountainous west, including the Rocky Mountains, the Great Basin, California, and Alaska; the raised but relatively flat plateau of the Canadian Shield in the northeast; and the varied eastern region, which includes the Appalachian Mountains, the coastal plain along the Atlantic seaboard, and the Florida peninsula.
Mexico, with its long plateaus and cordilleras, falls largely in the western region, although the eastern coastal plain does extend south along the Gulf.
The western mountains are split in the middle into the main range of the Rockies and the coast ranges in California, Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia, with the Great Basin—a lower area containing smaller ranges and low-lying deserts—in between.
The highest peak is Denali (also called Mount McKinley) in Alaska.
Geographical Survey (USGS) states that the geographic center of North America is "6 miles [10 km] west of Balta, Pierce County, North Dakota" at about 48°10′N 100°10′W, about 24 kilometers (15 mi) from Rugby, North Dakota.
The USGS further states that "No marked or monumented point has been established by any government agency as the geographic center of either the 50 states, the conterminous United States, or the North American continent.
The North American continental pole of inaccessibility is located 1,650 km (1,030 mi) from the nearest coastline, between Allen and Kyle, South Dakota at 43.
The Laurentian Upland, part of the Canadian Shield Northern portion of the upper midwestern U.
North America is a very large continent that extends from north of the Arctic Circle to south of the Tropic of Cancer.
Greenland, along with the Canadian Shield, is tundra with average temperatures ranging from 10 to 20 °C (50 to 68 °F), but central Greenland is composed of a very large ice sheet.
This tundra radiates throughout Canada, but its border ends near the Rocky Mountains (but still contains Alaska) and at the end of the Canadian Shield, near the Great Lakes.
Climate west of the Cascade Range is described as being temperate weather with average precipitation 20 inches (510 millimeters).
Climate in coastal California is described to be Mediterranean, with average temperatures in cities like San Francisco ranging from 57 to 70 °F (14 to 21 °C) over the course of the year.
Stretching from the East Coast to eastern North Dakota, and stretching down to Kansas, is the humid continental climate featuring intense seasons, with a large amount of annual precipitation, with places like New York City averaging 50 in (1,300 mm).
Starting at the southern border of the humid continental climate and stretching to the Gulf of Mexico (while encompassing the eastern half of Texas) is the humid subtropical climate.
This area has the wettest cities in the contiguous U.
Stretching from the borders of the humid continental and subtropical climates, and going west to the Sierra Nevada, south to the southern tip of Durango, north to the border with tundra climate, the steppe/desert climates are the driest in the U.
Highland climates cut from north to south of the continent, where subtropical or temperate climates occur just below the tropics, as in central Mexico and Guatemala.
Tropical climates appear in the island regions and in the subcontinent's bottleneck, found in countries and states bathed by the Caribbean Sea or to the south of the Gulf of Mexico and the Pacific Ocean.
Precipitation patterns vary across the region, and as such rainforest, monsoon, and savanna types can be found, with rains and high temperatures throughout the year.
Notable North American fauna include the bison, black bear, jaguar, cougar, prairie dog, turkey, pronghorn, raccoon, coyote, and monarch butterfly.
Notable plants that were domesticated in North America include tobacco, maize, squash, tomato, sunflower, blueberry, avocado, cotton, chile pepper, and vanilla.
Laurentia is an ancient craton which forms the geologic core of North America; it formed between 1.
The Canadian Shield is the largest exposure of this craton.
From the Late Paleozoic to Early Mesozoic eras, North America was joined with the other modern-day continents as part of the supercontinent Pangaea, with Eurasia to its east.
One of the results of the formation of Pangaea was the Appalachian Mountains, which formed some 480 mya, making it among the oldest mountain ranges in the world.
When Pangaea began to rift around 200 mya, North America became part of Laurasia, before it separated from Eurasia as its own continent during the mid-Cretaceous period.
The Rockies and other western mountain ranges began forming around this time from a period of mountain building called the Laramide orogeny, between 80 and 55 mya.
The formation of the Isthmus of Panama that connected the continent to South America arguably occurred approximately 12 to 15 mya, and the Great Lakes (as well as many other northern freshwater lakes and rivers) were carved by receding glaciers about 10,000 years ago.
North America is the source of much of what humanity knows about geologic time periods.
The geographic area that would later become the United States has been the source of more varieties of dinosaurs than any other modern country.
According to paleontologist Peter Dodson, this is primarily due to stratigraphy, climate and geography, human resources, and history.
Much of the Mesozoic Era is represented by exposed outcrops in the many arid regions of the continent.
The most significant Late Jurassic dinosaur-bearing fossil deposit in North America is the Morrison Formation of the western U.
Canada is geologically one of the oldest regions in the world, with more than half of the region consisting of Precambrian rocks that have been above sea level since the beginning of the Palaeozoic era.
Canada's mineral resources are diverse and extensive.
Across the Canadian Shield and in the north there are large iron, nickel, zinc, copper, gold, lead, molybdenum, and uranium reserves.
Large diamond concentrations have been recently developed in the Arctic, making Canada one of the world's largest producers.
Throughout the Shield, there are many mining towns extracting these minerals.
The largest, and best known, is Sudbury, Ontario.
Sudbury is an exception to the normal process of forming minerals in the Shield since there is significant evidence that the Sudbury Basin is an ancient meteorite impact crater.
The nearby, but less-known Temagami Magnetic Anomaly has striking similarities to the Sudbury Basin.
Its magnetic anomalies are very similar to the Sudbury Basin, and so it could be a second metal-rich impact crater.
The Shield is also covered by vast boreal forests that support an important logging industry.
Each province has its own geologic history and unique features.
The geology of Alaska is typical of that of the cordillera, while the major islands of Hawaii consist of Neogene volcanics erupted over a hot spot.
Central America is geologically active with volcanic eruptions and earthquakes occurring from time to time.
In 1976 Guatemala was hit by a major earthquake, killing 23,000 people; Managua, the capital of Nicaragua, was devastated by earthquakes in 1931 and 1972, the last one killing about 5,000 people; three earthquakes devastated El Salvador, one in 1986 and two in 2001; one earthquake devastated northern and central Costa Rica in 2009, killing at least 34 people; in Honduras a powerful earthquake killed seven people in 2009.
Volcanic eruptions are common in the region.
In 1968, the Arenal Volcano, in Costa Rica, erupted and killed 87 people.
Fertile soils from weathered volcanic lavas have made it possible to sustain dense populations in agriculturally productive highland areas.
Central America has many mountain ranges; the longest are the Sierra Madre de Chiapas, the Cordillera Isabelia, and the Cordillera de Talamanca.
Between the mountain ranges lie fertile valleys that are suitable for the people; in fact, most of the population of Honduras, Costa Rica, and Guatemala live in valleys.
Valleys are also suitable for the production of coffee, beans, and other crops.
North America's GDP per capita was evaluated in October 2016 by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to be $41,830, making it the richest continent in the world, followed by Oceania.
Canada, Mexico, and the U.
Canada shows significant growth in the sectors of services, mining and manufacturing.
Canada's per capita GDP (PPP) was estimated at $44,656 and it had the 11th-largest GDP (nominal) in 2014.
Canada's services sector comprises 78% of the country's GDP (estimated in 2010), industry comprises 20% and agriculture comprises 2%.
Mexico has a per capita GDP (PPP) of $16,111 and as of 2014 is the 15th-largest GDP (nominal) in the world.
Being a newly industrialized country, Mexico maintains both modern and outdated industrial and agricultural facilities and operations.
Its main sources of income are oil, industrial exports, manufactured goods, electronics, heavy industry, automobiles, construction, food, banking and financial services.
The North American economy is well defined and structured in three main economic areas.
These areas are those under the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM), and the Central American Common Market (CACM).
Of these trade blocs, the U.
In addition to the larger trade blocs there is the Canada-Costa Rica Free Trade Agreement among numerous other free-trade relations, often between the larger, more developed countries and Central American and Caribbean countries.
NAFTA formed one of the four largest trade blocs in the world.
Its implementation in 1994 was designed for economic homogenization with hopes of eliminating barriers of trade and foreign investment between Canada, the U.
While Canada and the U.
The free-trade agreement allowed for the elimination of tariffs that had previously been in place on U.
Trade volume has steadily increased annually and in 2010, surface trade between the three NAFTA nations reached an all-time historical increase of 24.
The NAFTA trade bloc GDP (PPP) is the world's largest with US$17.
This is in part attributed to the fact that the economy of the U.
The countries of NAFTA are also some of each other's largest trade partners.
In 2018, the NAFTA was replaced by the U.
The Caribbean trade bloc (CARICOM) came into agreement in 1973 when it was signed by 15 Caribbean nations.
As of 2000, CARICOM trade volume was US$96 billion.
CARICOM also allowed for the creation of a common passport for associated nations.
In the past decade the trade bloc focused largely on free-trade agreements and under the CARICOM Office of Trade Negotiations free-trade agreements have been signed into effect.
Integration of Central American economies occurred under the signing of the Central American Common Market agreement in 1961; this was the first attempt to engage the nations of this area into stronger financial cooperation.
The 2006 implementation of the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) left the future of the CACM unclear.
The Central American Free Trade Agreement was signed by five Central American countries, the Dominican Republic, and the U.
The focal point of CAFTA is to create a free trade area similar to that of NAFTA.
In addition to the U.
These nations also take part in inter-continental trade blocs.
Mexico takes a part in the G3 Free Trade Agreement with Colombia and Venezuela and has a trade agreement with the EU.
The Pan-American Highway route in the Americas is the portion of a network of roads nearly 48,000 km (30,000 mi) in length which travels through the mainland nations.
No definitive length of the Pan-American Highway exists because the U.
However, the total length of the portion from Mexico to the northern extremity of the highway is roughly 26,000 km (16,000 mi).
The first transcontinental railroad in the U.
Finished on 10 May 1869 at the famous golden spike event at Promontory Summit, Utah, it created a nationwide mechanized transportation network that revolutionized the population and economy of the American western frontier, catalyzing the transition from the wagon trains of previous decades to a modern transportation system.
Although an accomplishment, it achieved the status of first transcontinental railroad by connecting myriad eastern U.
The Canadian Grand Trunk Railway had, by 1867, already accumulated more than 2,055 km (1,277 mi) of track by connecting Ontario with the Canadian Atlantic provinces west as far as Port Huron, Michigan, through Sarnia, Ontario.
A shared telephone system known as the North American Numbering Plan is an integrated telephone numbering plan of 24 countries and territories: the U.
Canada and the United States are the wealthiest and most developed nations on the continent followed by Mexico, a newly industrialized country.
The countries of Central America and the Caribbean are at various levels of economic and human development.
For example, small Caribbean island-nations, such as Barbados, Trinidad and Tobago, and Antigua and Barbuda, have a higher GDP (PPP) per capita than Mexico due to their smaller populations.
Panama and Costa Rica have a significantly higher Human Development Index and GDP than the rest of the Central American nations.
Additionally, despite Greenland's vast resources in oil and minerals, much of them remain untapped, and the island is economically dependent on fishing, tourism, and subsidies from Denmark.
Nevertheless, the island is highly developed.
Demographically, North America is ethnically diverse.
Its three largest groups are Whites, Mestizos, and Blacks.
There is a significant minority of Indigenous Americans and Asians among other less numerous groups.
The dominant languages in North America are English, Spanish, and French.
Danish is prevalent in Greenland alongside Greenlandic, and Dutch is spoken side by side local languages in the Dutch Caribbean.
The term Anglo-America is used to refer to the anglophone countries of the Americas: namely Canada (where English and French are co-official) and the U.
Latin America refers to the other areas of the Americas (generally south of the U.
The French language has historically played a significant role in North America and now retains a distinctive presence in some regions.
Canada is officially bilingual.
French is the official language of the province of Quebec, where 95% of the people speak it as either their first or second language, and it is co-official with English in the province of New Brunswick.
Other French-speaking locales include the province of Ontario (the official language is English, but there are an estimated 600,000 Franco-Ontarians), the province of Manitoba (co-official as de jure with English), the French West Indies and Saint-Pierre et Miquelon, as well as the U.
Haiti is included with this group based on historical association but Haitians speak both Creole and French.
Similarly, French and French Antillean Creole is spoken in Saint Lucia and the Commonwealth of Dominica alongside English.
A significant number of indigenous languages are spoken in North America, with roughly 6 million in Mexico speaking an indigenous language at home, 372,000 people in the U.
Christianity is the largest religion in the United States, Canada, and Mexico.
According to a 2012 Pew Research Center survey, 77% of the population considered themselves Christians.
Christianity also is the predominant religion in the 23 dependent territories in North America.
Mexico has the world's second-largest number of Catholics, surpassed only by Brazil.
According to the same study, the religiously unaffiliated (including agnostics and atheists) make up about 17% of the population of Canada and the U.
Those with no religious affiliation make up about 24% of Canada's total population.
The largest number of Jews can be found in the U.
In Mexico there were 3,700 Muslims in 2010.
In 2012, U-T San Diego estimated U.
The predominant religion in Mexico and Central America is Christianity (96%).
Beginning with the Spanish colonization of Mexico in the 16th century, Roman Catholicism was the only religion permitted by Spanish crown and Catholic church.
A vast campaign of religious conversion, the so-called "spiritual conquest", was launched to bring the indigenous peoples into the Christian fold.
The Inquisition was established to assure orthodox belief and practice.
The Catholic Church remained an important institution, so that even after political independence, Roman Catholicism remained the dominant religion.
Since the 1960s, there has been an increase in other Christian groups, particularly Protestantism, as well as other religious organizations, and individuals identifying themselves as having no religion.
Christianity is also the predominant religion in the Caribbean (85%).
Other religious groups in the region are Hinduism, Islam, Rastafari (in Jamaica), and Afro-American religions such as Santería and Vodou.
North America is the fourth most populous continent after Asia, Africa, and Europe.
Its most populous country is the U.
The second-largest country is Mexico with a population of 126 million.
Canada is the third-most-populous country with 41.
The majority of Caribbean island-nations have national populations under a million, though Cuba, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Puerto Rico (a territory of the U.
Greenland has a small population of 55,984 for its massive size (2.
There are also large cities in the Caribbean.
The largest cities in North America, by far, are Mexico City and New York City.
These cities are the only cities on the continent to exceed eight million, and two of three in the Americas.
Next in size are Los Angeles, Toronto, Chicago, Havana, Santo Domingo, and Montreal.
Cities in the Sun Belt regions of the U.
These causes included warm temperatures, retirement of Baby Boomers, large industry, and the influx of immigrants.
Most notable is Tijuana, a city bordering San Diego that receives immigrants from all over Latin America and parts of Europe and Asia.
Yet as cities grow in these warmer regions of North America, they are increasingly forced to deal with the major issue of water shortages.
Eight of the top ten metropolitan areas are located in the U.
These metropolitan areas all have a population of above 5.
While the majority of the largest metropolitan areas are within the U.
Canada also breaks into the top ten largest metropolitan areas with the Toronto metropolitan area having six million people.
The proximity of cities to each other on the Canada–United States border and the Mexico–U.
These urban agglomerations are observed at their largest and most productive in Detroit–Windsor and San Diego–Tijuana and experience large commercial, economic, and cultural activity.
The metropolitan areas are responsible for millions of dollars of trade dependent on international freight.
In Detroit-Windsor the Border Transportation Partnership study in 2004 concluded US$13 billion was dependent on the Detroit–Windsor international border crossing while in San Diego–Tijuana freight at the Otay Mesa Port of Entry was valued at US$20 billion.
North America has also been witness to the growth of megapolitan areas.
The United States includes eleven megaregions.
The cultures of North America are diverse.
The United States and English Canada have many cultural similarities, while French Canada has a distinct culture from Anglophone Canada that is protected by law.
Since the United States was formed from portions previously part of the Spanish Empire and then independent Mexico, and since there has been considerable and continuing immigration of Spanish speakers from south of the U.
Mexico and Central America are part of Latin America and are culturally distinct from anglophone and francophone North America.
However, they share with the United States the establishment of post-independence governments that are federated representative republics with written constitutions dating from their founding as nations.
Canada is a federated parliamentary democracy under a constitutional monarchy.
Canada's constitution dates to 1867, with confederation, in the British North America Act, but not until 1982 did Canada have the power to amend its own constitution.
Canada's Francophone heritage has been enshrined in law since the British parliament passed the Quebec Act of 1774.
In contrast to largely Protestant Anglo settlers in North America, French-speaking Canadians were Catholic.
The Quebec Act guaranteed the freedom of Catholic Francophone Canadians to practice their religion, restored the right of the Catholic Church to impose tithes for its support, and established French civil law in most circumstances.
The distinctiveness of French language and culture has been codified in Canadian law, so that both English and French are designated official languages.
The Canadian government took action to protect Canadian culture by limiting non-Canadian content in broadcasting, creating the Canadian Radio and Telecommunications Commission to monitor Canadian content.
In Quebec, the provincial government established the Quebec Office of the French Language, often called the "language police" by Anglophones, which mandates the use of French terminology and signage in French.
Since 1968 the unicameral legislature has been called the Quebec National Assembly.
Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day, 24 June, is the national holiday of Quebec and is celebrated by francophone Canadians throughout Canada.
In Quebec, the school system was divided into Catholic and Protestant, so-called confessional schools.
Anglophone education in Quebec has been increasingly undermined.
Latino culture is strong in the southwestern United States, as well as in the New York metropolitan area and Florida, which draw Latin Americans from many countries in the Western Hemisphere.
Northern Mexico, particularly in the cities of Monterrey, Tijuana, Ciudad Juárez, and Mexicali, is strongly influenced by the culture and way of life of the U.
Monterrey, a modern city with a significant industrial group, has been regarded as the most Americanized city in Mexico.
The Anglophone Caribbean states have witnessed and participated in the decline of the British Empire and its influence on the region, as well as the increase in the economic influence of Northern America over the Anglophone Caribbean.
This is partly due to the relatively small populations of the English-speaking Caribbean countries, and also because many of them now have more people living abroad than those remaining at home.
Greenland has experienced many immigration waves from Northern Canada, e.
Therefore, Greenland shares some cultural ties with the indigenous peoples of Canada.
Greenland is also considered Nordic and has strong Danish ties due to centuries of colonization by Denmark.
The United States and Canada have major sports teams that compete against each other, including baseball, basketball, hockey, and soccer/football.
Canada, Mexico, and the United States will host the 2026 FIFA World Cup.
The Native American game of lacrosse is considered a national sport in Canada.
Curling is an important winter sport in Canada, and the Winter Olympics includes it in the roster.
The English sport of cricket is popular in parts of anglophone Canada and very popular in parts of the former British empire, but in Canada is considered a minor sport.
Boxing is also a major sport in some countries, such as Mexico, Panama and Puerto Rico, and it is considered one of the main individual sports in the United States.
Canada has a separate Canadian Football League from the U.
The following table shows the most prominent sports leagues in North America, in order of average revenue.
Encyclopædia Britannica.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard Library.
Archived from the original on March 25, 2023.
Retrieved March 25, 2023.
South America is a continent entirely in the Western Hemisphere and mostly in the Southern Hemisphere, with a considerably smaller portion in the Northern Hemisphere.
It can also be described as the southern subregion of the Americas.
South America is bordered on the west by the Pacific Ocean, on the north and east by the Atlantic Ocean, and to the south by the Drake Passage; North America, the Caribbean Sea lying to the northwest, and the Antarctic Circle, Antarctica, and the Antarctic Peninsula to the south.
The continent includes twelve sovereign countries: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Uruguay, and Venezuela; two dependent territories: the Falkland Islands and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands; and one internal territory: French Guiana.
The Caribbean South America ABC islands (Aruba, Bonaire, and Curaçao) and Trinidad and Tobago are geologically located on the South-American continental shelf, and thus may be considered part of South America as well.
Panama, Ascension Island (a part of Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha) and Bouvet Island (a dependency of Norway) may also be considered parts of South America.
South America has an area of 17,840,000 square kilometers (6,890,000 sq mi).
Its population as of 2021 has been estimated at more than 434 million.
South America ranks fourth in area (after Asia, Africa, and North America) and fifth in population (after Asia, Africa, Europe, and North America).
Brazil is by far the most populous South American country, with almost half of the continent's population, followed by Colombia, Argentina, Venezuela, and Peru.
In recent decades, Brazil has also generated half of the continent's GDP and has become the continent's first regional power.
Most of the population lives near the continent's western or eastern coasts while the interior and the far south are sparsely populated.
The geography of western South America is dominated by the Andes mountains; in contrast, the eastern part contains both highland regions and vast lowlands where rivers such as the Amazon, Orinoco and Paraná flow.
Most of the continent lies in the tropics, except for a large part of the Southern Cone located in the middle latitudes.
The continent's cultural and ethnic outlook has its origin with the interaction of Indigenous peoples with European conquerors and immigrants and, more locally, with African slaves.
Given a long history of colonialism, the overwhelming majority of South Americans speak Spanish or Portuguese, and societies and states are rich in Western traditions.
Relative to Africa, Asia, and Europe, post-1900 South America has been a peaceful continent with few wars, although high rates of violent crime remain a concern in some countries.
South America is thought to have been first inhabited by humans when people were crossing the Bering Land Bridge (now the Bering Strait) at least 15,000 years ago from the territory that is present-day Russia.
They migrated south through North America, and eventually reached South America through the Isthmus of Panama.
Amongst the oldest evidence for human presence in South America is the Monte Verde II site in Chile, suggested to date to around 14,500 years ago.
From around 13,000 years ago, the Fishtail projectile point style became widespread across South America, with its disappearance around 11,000 years ago coincident with the disappearance of South America's megafauna.
Maize was present in northern South America by around 6,000 years ago.
By 2000 BC, many agrarian communities had been settled throughout the Andes and the surrounding regions.
Fishing became a widespread practice along the coast, helping establish fish as a primary source of food.
Irrigation systems were also developed at this time, which aided in the rise of an agrarian society.
South American cultures began domesticating llamas and alpacas in the highlands of the Andes circa 3500 BC.
Besides their use as sources of meat and wool, these animals were used for transportation of goods.
The rise of plant growing and the subsequent appearance of permanent human settlements allowed for the multiple and overlapping beginnings of civilizations in South America.
One of the earliest known South American civilizations was Caral–Supe, on the central Peruvian coast.
Though a pre-ceramic culture, the monumental architecture of Caral–Supe created one of the first cities of the world, generally dated to around 3500 BC, at Huaricanga in the Fortaleza area, contemporaneous with the pyramids of Ancient Egypt, one of the oldest-known civilizations in the Americas and one of the six sites where civilization separately originated in the ancient world.
Caral–Supe governing class established a trade network and developed agriculture then followed by Chavín by 900 BC, according to some estimates and archaeological finds.
Artifacts were found at a site called Chavín de Huantar in modern Peru at an elevation of 3,177 meters (10,423 ft).
Chavín civilization spanned 900 BC to 300 BC.
In the central coast of Peru, around the beginning of the 1st millennium AD, Moche (100 BC – 700 AD, at the northern coast of Peru), Paracas and Nazca (400 BC – 800 AD, Peru) cultures flourished with centralized states with permanent militia improving agriculture through irrigation and new styles of ceramic art.
At the Altiplano, Tiahuanaco or Tiwanaku (100 BC – 1200 AD, Bolivia) managed a large commercial network based on religion.
Around the 7th century, both Tiahuanaco and Wari or Huari Empire (600–1200, Central and northern Peru) expanded its influence to all the Andean region, imposing the Huari urbanism and Tiahuanaco religious iconography.
The Muisca were the main indigenous civilization in what is now Colombia.
They established the Muisca Confederation of many clans, or cacicazgos, that had a free trade network among themselves.
Many were goldsmiths and farmers.
Other important Pre-Columbian cultures include: the Cañaris (in south central Ecuador), Chimú Empire (1300–1470, Peruvian northern coast), Chachapoyas, and the Aymaran kingdoms (1000–1450, Western Bolivia and southern Peru).
Holding their capital at the great city of Cusco, the Inca civilization dominated the Andes region from 1438 to 1533.
Known as Tawantin suyu, and "the land of the four regions", in Quechua, the Inca Empire was highly distinct and developed.
Inca rule extended to nearly a hundred linguistic or ethnic communities, some nine to fourteen million people connected by a 25,000 kilometer road system.
Cities were built with precise, unmatched stonework, constructed over many levels of mountain terrain.
Terrace farming was a useful form of agriculture.
The Mapuche in Central and Southern Chile resisted the European and Chilean settlers, waging the Arauco War for more than 300 years.
In 1494, Portugal and Spain, the two great maritime European powers of that time, on the expectation of new lands being discovered in the west, signed the Treaty of Tordesillas, by which they agreed, with the support of the Pope, that all the land outside Europe should be an exclusive duopoly between the two countries.
The treaty established an imaginary line along a north–south meridian 370 leagues (approximately 1,110 mi (1,790 km)) west of the Cape Verde Islands, roughly 46° 37' W.
In terms of the treaty, all land to the west of the line (known to comprise most of the South American soil) would belong to Spain, and all land to the east, to Portugal.
As accurate measurements of longitude were impossible at that time, the line was not strictly enforced, resulting in a Portuguese expansion of Brazil across the meridian.
Beginning in the 1530s, the people and natural resources of South America were repeatedly exploited by foreign conquistadors, first from Spain and later from Portugal.
These competing colonial nations claimed the land and resources as their own and divided it into colonies.
European infectious diseases (smallpox, influenza, measles, and typhus) – to which the native populations had no immune resistance – caused large-scale depopulation of the native population under Spanish control.
Systems of forced labor, such as the haciendas and mining industry's mit'a also contributed to the depopulation.
After this, enslaved Africans, who had developed immunities to these diseases, were quickly brought in to replace them.
The Spaniards were committed to converting their native subjects to Christianity and were quick to purge any native cultural practices that hindered this end; however, many initial attempts at this were only partially successful, as native groups simply blended Catholicism with their established beliefs and practices.
Furthermore, the Spaniards brought their language to the degree they did with their religion, although the Roman Catholic Church's evangelization in Quechua, Aymara, and Guaraní actually contributed to the continuous use of these native languages albeit only in the oral form.
Eventually, the natives and the Spaniards interbred, forming a mestizo class.
At the beginning, many mestizos of the Andean region were offspring of Amerindian mothers and Spanish fathers.
After independence, most mestizos had native fathers and European or mestizo mothers.
Many native artworks were considered pagan idols and destroyed by Spanish explorers; this included many gold and silver sculptures and other artifacts found in South America, which were melted down before their transport to Spain or Portugal.
Spaniards and Portuguese brought the western European architectural style to the continent, and helped to improve infrastructures like bridges, roads, and the sewer system of the cities they discovered or conquered.
They also significantly increased economic and trade relations, not just between the old and new world but between the different South American regions and peoples.
Finally, with the expansion of the Portuguese and Spanish languages, many cultures that were previously separated became united through that of Latin American.
Guyana was initially colonized by the Dutch before coming under British control, though there was a brief period during the Napoleonic Wars when it was occupied by the French.
The region was initially partitioned between the Dutch, French and British before fully coming under the control of Britain.
Suriname was first explored by the Spanish in the 16th century and then settled by the English in the mid-17th century.
It became a Dutch colony in 1667.
The indigenous peoples of the Americas in various European colonies were forced to work in European plantations and mines; along with enslaved Africans who were also introduced in the proceeding centuries via the Atlantic slave trade.
European colonists were heavily dependent on indigenous labor during the initial phases of settlement to maintain the subsistence economy, and natives were often captured by expeditions.
The importation of African slaves began midway through the 16th century, but the enslavement of indigenous peoples continued well into the 17th and 18th centuries.
The slave trade brought enslaved Africans primarily to South American colonies, beginning with the Portuguese since 1502.
The main destinations of this phase were the Caribbean colonies and Brazil, as European nations built up economically slave-dependent colonies in the New World.
Nearly 40% of all African slaves trafficked to the Americas went to Brazil.
In contrast to other European colonies in the Americas which mainly used the labor of African slaves, Spanish colonists mainly enslaved indigenous Americans.
In 1750, the Portuguese Crown abolished the enslavement of indigenous peoples in colonial Brazil, under the belief that they were unfit for labor and less effective than enslaved Africans.
Enslaved Africans were brought to the Americas on slave ships, under inhuman conditions and ill-treatment, and those who survived were sold in slave markets.
After independence, all South American countries maintained slavery for some time.
The first South American country to abolish slavery was Chile in 1823, Uruguay in 1830, Bolivia in 1831, Guyana in 1833, Colombia and Ecuador in 1851, Argentina in 1853, Peru and Venezuela in 1854, Suriname in 1863, Paraguay in 1869, and in 1888 Brazil was the last South American nation and the last country in the Western world to abolish slavery.
The European Peninsular War (1807–14), a theater of the Napoleonic Wars, changed the political situation of the Spanish and Portuguese colonies.
First, Napoleon invaded Portugal, but the House of Braganza avoided capture by escaping to Brazil.
Napoleon captured King Ferdinand VII of Spain, and appointed his own brother instead.
This appointment provoked popular resistance, which created Juntas to rule in the name of the captured king.
Many cities in the Spanish colonies, however, considered themselves equally authorized to appoint local Juntas like those of Spain.
This began the Spanish American wars of independence between the patriots, who promoted such autonomy, and the royalists, who supported Spanish authority over the Americas.
The Juntas, in both Spain and the Americas, promoted the ideas of the Enlightenment.
Five years after the beginning of the war, Ferdinand VII returned to the throne and began the Absolutist Restoration, as the royalists got the upper hand in the conflict.
The independence of South America was secured by Simón Bolívar (Venezuela) and José de San Martín (Argentina), the two most important Libertadores.
Bolívar led a great uprising in the north, then led his army south towards Lima, the capital of the Viceroyalty of Peru.
Meanwhile, San Martín led an army across the Andes Mountains, along with Chilean expatriates, and liberated Chile.
He organized a fleet to reach Peru by sea, and sought the military support of various rebels from the Viceroyalty of Peru.
In 1822 the two men met at the Guayaquil Conference in Ecuador, where they failed to agree on governance strategies for the liberated nations.
Two years later Bolívar's forces beat the Spanish at the Battle of Ayacucho, securing the independence of Peru and the rest of South America.
In the Portuguese Kingdom of Brazil, Dom Pedro I (also Pedro IV of Portugal), son of the Portuguese King Dom João VI, proclaimed the independent Kingdom of Brazil in 1822, which later became the Empire of Brazil.
Despite the Portuguese loyalties of garrisons in Bahia, Cisplatina and Pará, independence was diplomatically accepted by Portugal in 1825, on condition of a high compensation paid by Brazil mediated by the United Kingdom.
The newly independent nations began a process of fragmentation, with several civil and international wars.
However, it was not as strong as in Central America.
Some countries created from provinces of larger countries stayed as such up to modern times (such as Paraguay or Uruguay), while others were reconquered and reincorporated into their former countries (such as the Republic of Entre Ríos and the Riograndense Republic).
The first separatist attempt was in 1820 by the Argentine province of Entre Ríos, led by a caudillo.
In spite of the "Republic" in its title, General Ramírez, its caudillo, never really intended to declare an independent Entre Rios.
Rather, he was making a political statement in opposition to the monarchist and centralist ideas that back then permeated Buenos Aires politics.
The "country" was reincorporated at the United Provinces in 1821.
In 1825, the Cisplatine Province declared its independence from the Empire of Brazil, which led to the Cisplatine War between the imperials and the Argentine from the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata to control the region.
Three years later, the United Kingdom intervened in the question by proclaiming a tie and creating in the former Cisplatina a new independent country: The Oriental Republic of Uruguay.
Later in 1836, while Brazil was experiencing the chaos of the regency, Rio Grande do Sul proclaimed its independence motivated by a tax crisis.
With the anticipation of the coronation of Pedro II to the throne of Brazil, the country could stabilize and fight the separatists, which the province of Santa Catarina had joined in 1839.
The Conflict came to an end by a process of compromise by which both Riograndense Republic and Juliana Republic were reincorporated as provinces in 1845.
The Peru–Bolivian Confederation, a short-lived union of Peru and Bolivia, was blocked by Chile in the War of the Confederation (1836–1839) and again during the War of the Pacific (1879–1883).
Paraguay was virtually destroyed by Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay in the Paraguayan War.
Despite the Spanish American wars of independence and the Brazilian War of Independence, the new nations quickly began to suffer with internal conflicts and wars among themselves.
Most of the countries' borders who had initially accepted the 1810 borders on the uti possidetis iuris principle had by 1848 either been altered by war or were contested.
In 1825, the proclamation of independence of Cisplatina led to the Cisplatine War between historical rivals the Empire of Brazil and the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata, Argentina's predecessor.
The result was a stalemate, ending with the British government arranging for the independence of Uruguay.
Soon after, another Brazilian province proclaimed its independence leading to the Ragamuffin War which Brazil won.
Between 1836 and 1839, the War of the Confederation broke out between the short-lived Peru-Bolivian Confederation and Chile, with the support of the Argentine Confederation.
The war was fought mostly in the actual territory of Peru and ended with a Confederate defeat and the dissolution of the Confederacy and annexation of many territories by Argentina.
Meanwhile, the Argentine Civil Wars plagued Argentina since its independence.
The conflict was mainly between those who defended the centralization of power in Buenos Aires and those who defended a confederation.
During this period it can be said that "there were two Argentines": the Argentine Confederation and the Argentine Republic.
At the same time, the political instability in Uruguay led to the Uruguayan Civil War among the main political factions of the country.
All this instability in the platine region interfered with the goals of other countries such as Brazil, which was soon forced to take sides.
In 1851, the Brazilian Empire, supporting the centralizing unitarians, and the Uruguayan government invaded Argentina and deposed the caudillo, Juan Manuel Rosas, who ruled the confederation with an iron hand.
Although the Platine War did not put an end to the political chaos and civil war in Argentina, it brought temporary peace to Uruguay where the Colorados faction won, supported by Brazil, Britain, France and the Unitarian Party of Argentina.
Peace lasted only a short time: in 1864, the Uruguayan factions faced each other again in the Uruguayan War.
The Blancos supported by Paraguay started to attack Brazilian and Argentine farmers near the borders.
The Empire made an initial attempt to settle the dispute between Blancos and Colorados without success.
In 1864, after a Brazilian ultimatum was refused, the imperial government declared that Brazil's military would begin reprisals.
Brazil declined to acknowledge a formal state of war, and, for most of its duration, the Uruguayan–Brazilian armed conflict was an undeclared war which led to the deposition of the Blancos and the rise of the pro-Brazilian Colorados to power again.
This angered the Paraguayan government, which even before the end of the war invaded Brazil, beginning the longest and bloodiest inter-state war in Latin American history: the Paraguayan War.
The Paraguayan War began when the Paraguayan dictator Francisco Solano López ordered the invasion of the Brazilian provinces of Mato Grosso and Rio Grande do Sul.
His attempt to cross Argentinian territory without Argentinian approval led the pro-Brazilian Argentine government into the war.
The pro-Brazilian Uruguayan government showed its support by sending troops.
In 1865 the three countries signed the Treaty of the Triple Alliance against Paraguay.
At the beginning of the war, the Paraguayans took the lead with several victories, until the Triple Alliance organized to repel the invaders and fight effectively.
This was the second total war experience in the world after the American Civil War.
It was deemed the greatest war effort in the history of all participating countries, taking almost 6 years and ending with the complete devastation of Paraguay.
The country lost 40% of its territory to Brazil and Argentina and lost 60% of its population, including 90% of the men.
The dictator Lopez was killed in battle and a new government was instituted in alliance with Brazil, which maintained occupation forces in the country until 1876.
The last South American war in the 19th century was the War of the Pacific with Bolivia and Peru on one side and Chile on the other.
In 1879 the war began with Chilean troops occupying Bolivian ports, followed by Bolivia declaring war on Chile which activated an alliance treaty with Peru.
The Bolivians were completely defeated in 1880 and Lima was occupied in 1881.
Peace was signed with Peru in 1883 while a truce was signed with Bolivia in 1884.
Chile annexed territories of both countries leaving Bolivia landlocked.
In the new century, as wars became less violent and less frequent, Brazil entered into a small conflict with Bolivia for the possession of the Acre, which was acquired by Brazil in 1902.
In 1917 Brazil declared war on the Central Powers, joined the allied side in the First World War and sent a small fleet to the Mediterranean Sea and some troops to be integrated with the British and French forces in the region.
Brazil was the only South American country that participated in the First World War.
Later in 1932 Colombia and Peru entered a short armed conflict for territory in the Amazon.
In the same year Paraguay declared war on Bolivia for possession of the Chaco, in a conflict that ended three years later with Paraguay's victory.
Between 1941 and 1942 Peru and Ecuador fought for territories claimed by both that were annexed by Peru, usurping Ecuador's frontier with Brazil.
Also in this period, the first major naval battle of World War II took place in the South Atlantic close to the continental mainland: the Battle of the River Plate, between a British cruiser squadron and a German pocket battleship.
The Germans still made numerous attacks on Brazilian ships on the coast, causing Brazil to declare war on the Axis powers in 1942, being the only South American country to fight in this war (and in both World Wars).
Brazil sent naval and air forces to combat German and Italian submarines off the continent and throughout the South Atlantic, in addition to sending an expeditionary force to fight in the Italian Campaign.
A brief war was fought between Argentina and the UK in 1982, following an Argentine invasion of the Falkland Islands, which ended with an Argentine defeat.
The last international war to be fought on South American soil was the 1995 Cenepa War between Ecuador and Peru along their mutual border.
Wars became less frequent in the 20th century, with Bolivia-Paraguay and Peru-Ecuador fighting the last inter-state wars.
Early in the 20th century, the three wealthiest South American countries engaged in a vastly expensive naval arms race which began after the introduction of a new warship type, the "dreadnought".
At one point, the Argentine government was spending a fifth of its entire yearly budget for just two dreadnoughts, a price that did not include later in-service costs, which for the Brazilian dreadnoughts was sixty percent of the initial purchase.
The continent became a battlefield of the Cold War in the late 20th century.
Some democratically elected governments of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Uruguay and Paraguay were overthrown or displaced by military dictatorships in the 1960s and 1970s.
To curtail opposition, their governments detained tens of thousands of political prisoners, many of whom were tortured or killed on inter-state collaboration.
Economically, they began a transition to neoliberal economic policies.
They placed their own actions within the US Cold War doctrine of "National Security" against internal subversion.
Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Peru suffered from an internal conflict.
In 1982, Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands, a British dependent territory.
The Falklands War began and 74 days later Argentine forces surrendered.
Colombia has had an ongoing, though diminished internal conflict, which started in 1964 with the creation of Marxist guerrillas (FARC-EP) and then involved several illegal armed groups of leftist-leaning ideology as well as the private armies of powerful drug lords.
Many of these are now defunct, and only a small portion of the ELN remains, along with the stronger, though also greatly reduced, FARC.
Revolutionary movements and right-wing military dictatorships became common after World War II, but since the 1980s, a wave of democratization passed through the continent, and democratic rule is widespread now.
Nonetheless, allegations of corruption are still very common, and several countries have developed crises which have forced the resignation of their governments, although, on most occasions, regular civilian succession has continued.
International indebtedness became a significant problem in the late 1980s, and some countries, despite having strong democracies, have not developed political institutions capable of handling such crises without resorting to unorthodox economic policies.
This was illustrated by Argentina's default in the early 21st century.
There has been an increased push towards regional integration, with the creation of uniquely South American institutions such as the Andean Community, Mercosur and Unasur.
Starting with the election of Hugo Chávez in Venezuela in 1998, the region experienced a pink tide – the election of several leftist and center-left administrations in most countries, except the Guianas and Colombia.
South America's political geography since the 1990s has been characterized by a desire to reduce foreign influence.
The nationalization of industries, by which the state controls entire economic sectors (as opposed of private companies doing it), has become a prominent political issue in the region.
Some South American nations have nationalized their electricity industries.
South America occupies the southern portion of the Americas.
The continent is generally delimited on the northwest by the Darién watershed along the Colombia–Panama border, although some may consider the border instead to be the Panama Canal.
Geopolitically and geographically, all of Panama – including the segment east of the Panama Canal in the isthmus – is typically included in North America alone and among the countries of Central America.
Almost all of mainland South America sits on the South American Plate.
South America is home to several superlatives, including the world's highest uninterrupted waterfall, Angel Falls in Venezuela; the highest single-drop waterfall Kaieteur Falls in Guyana; the largest river by volume, the Amazon River; the longest mountain range, the Andes (whose highest mountain is Aconcagua at 6,962 m or 22,841 ft); the driest non-polar place on earth, the Atacama Desert; the wettest place on earth, López de Micay in Colombia; the largest rainforest, the Amazon rainforest; the highest capital city, La Paz, Bolivia; the highest commercially navigable lake in the world, Lake Titicaca; and, excluding research stations in Antarctica, the world's southernmost permanently inhabited community, Puerto Toro, Chile.
South America had the highest annual deforestation rate in 2015–2025 of any region (4.
South America's major mineral resources are gold, silver, copper, iron ore, tin, and petroleum.
These resources have brought high income to its countries, especially in times of war or of rapid economic growth by industrialized countries elsewhere.
However, the concentration in producing one, or few, major export commercial products has often hindered the development and diversification of its economies.
The fluctuation in the price of commodities in international markets has led historically to major highs and lows, booms and busts, in the economies of South American states, often causing political instability.
This has led for calls to diversify production and increase trade within South America itself.
Brazil is the largest country in South America, covering a little less than half of the continent's land area and encompassing around half of the continent's population.
The remaining countries and territories are divided among four subregions: the Andean states, Caribbean South America, The Guianas, and the Southern Cone.
Physiographically, South America also includes some of the nearby islands.
The Dutch ABC islands (Aruba, Bonaire, and Curaçao), the islands of Trinidad and Tobago (Trinidad Island and Tobago Island etc.
Geopolitically, all the island countries and territories in the Caribbean have generally been grouped as a subregion of North America instead.
By contrast, Aves Island (administered by Venezuela) and the Archipelago of San Andrés, Providencia and Santa Catalina (San Andrés Island, Providencia Island, and Santa Catalina Island etc.
Other islands often associated with geopolitical South America are the Chiloé Archipelago and Robinson Crusoe Island (both administered by Chile), Easter Island (culturally a part of Oceania, also administered by Chile), the Galápagos Islands (administered by Ecuador, sometimes considered part of Oceania), and Tierra del Fuego (split between Argentina and Chile).
In the Atlantic Ocean, Brazil administers Fernando de Noronha, Trindade and Martim Vaz, and the Saint Peter and Saint Paul Archipelago, while the Falkland Islands (Spanish: Islas Malvinas) and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands (biogeographically and hydrologically associated with Antarctica) have been administered as two British Overseas Territories under the Crown, whose sovereignty over the islands is disputed by Argentina.
An isolated volcanic island on the South American Plate, Ascension Island is geologically a part of South America.
Administered as a dependency of Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha, the island is geopolitically a part of Africa.
Most of the world's major climate zones are present in South America.
The distribution of the average temperatures in the region presents a constant regularity from the 30° of latitude south, when the isotherms tend, more and more, to be confused with the degrees of latitude.
In temperate latitudes, winters and summers are milder than in North America.
This is because the most extensive part of the continent is in the equatorial zone (the region has more areas of equatorial plains than any other region), therefore giving the Southern Cone more oceanic influence, which moderates year round temperatures.
The average annual temperatures in the Amazon basin oscillate around 27 °C (81 °F), with low thermal amplitudes and high rainfall indices.
Between the Maracaibo Lake and the mouth of the Orinoco, that also includes parts of the Brazilian territory, an equatorial climate typical of the Congolese regions in Central Africa predominates.
The east-central Brazilian plateau has a humid and warm tropical climate.
The northern and eastern parts of the Argentine pampas have a humid subtropical climate with dry winters and humid summers commonly classified as a "Chinese type" climate, while the western and eastern ranges have a subtropical climate similar to the Dinaric Alps in Europe.
At the highest points of the Andean region, climates are colder than the ones occurring at the highest point of the Norwegian fjords.
In the Andean plateaus, the warm climate prevails, although it is tempered by the altitude, while in the coastal strip, there is an equatorial climate commonly classified as a "Guinean type" climate.
North of the Andean plateaus up to the north of the Chilean coast a Mediterranean oceanic climate dominates with temperate summers and cold winters akin to Cape Breton.
In Tierra del Fuego a cold climate persists that is commonly referred to as a "Siberian type" climate.
The distribution of rainfall is related to the regime of winds and air masses.
In most of the tropical region east of the Andes, winds blowing from the northeast, east and southeast carry moisture from the Atlantic, causing abundant rainfall.
However, due to a consistently strong wind shear and a weak Intertropical Convergence Zone, South Atlantic tropical cyclones are rare.
In the Orinoco Llanos and in the Guianas Plateau, the precipitation levels go from moderate to high.
The Pacific coast of Colombia and northern Ecuador are rainy regions, with Chocó in Colombia being the rainiest place in the world along with the northern slopes of Indian Himalayas.
The Atacama Desert, along this stretch of coast, is one of the driest regions in the world.
The central and southern parts of Chile are subject to extratropical cyclones, and most of the Argentine Patagonia is desert.
In the Pampas of Argentina, Uruguay and South of Brazil the rainfall is moderate, with rains well distributed during the year.
The moderately dry conditions of the Chaco oppose the intense rainfall of the eastern region of Paraguay.
In the semiarid coast of the Brazilian Northeast the rains are linked to a monsoon regime.
Important factors in the determination of climates are sea currents such as the Humboldt Current and Falkland Current.
The Equatorial Current of the South Atlantic strikes the coast of the Northeast where is divided into two others: the current of Brazil and a coastal current that flows to the northwest towards the Antilles from where it turns northeast forming the most important and famous ocean current in the world, the Gulf Stream.
South America is one of the most biodiverse continents on Earth.
It is home to many unique species of animals including the llama, anaconda, piranha, jaguar, eel, vicuña, and tapir, and to one of the largest known insects in the world, the Titan beetle.
The Amazon rainforests possess high biodiversity, with Brazil estimated to contain 10% of Earth's species.
Historically, the Hispanic countries were founded as Republican dictatorships led by caudillos.
Brazil was the only exception, being a constitutional monarchy for its first 67 years of independence, until a coup d'état proclaimed a republic.
In the late 19th century, the most democratic countries were Brazil, Chile, Argentina and Uruguay.
All South American countries are presidential republics with the exception of Suriname, a parliamentary republic.
French Guiana is a French overseas department, while the Falkland Islands and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands are British overseas territories.
It is currently the only inhabited continent in the world without monarchies; the Empire of Brazil existed during the 19th century and there was an unsuccessful attempt to establish a Kingdom of Araucanía and Patagonia in southern Argentina and Chile.
Also in the twentieth century, Suriname was established as a constituent kingdom of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and Guyana retained the British monarch as head of state for 4 years after its independence.
Recently, an intergovernmental entity has been formed which aims to merge the two existing customs unions: Mercosur and the Andean Community, thus forming the third-largest trade bloc in the world.
This new political organization, known as Union of South American Nations, seeks to establish free movement of people, economic development, a common defense policy and the elimination of tariffs.
Since 1930, the continent has experienced growth and diversification in most economic sectors.
Most agricultural and livestock products are destined for the domestic market and local consumption.
However, the export of agricultural products is essential for the balance of trade in most countries.
The main agrarian crops are export crops, such as soy and wheat.
The production of staple foods such as vegetables, corn or beans is large, but focused on domestic consumption.
Livestock raising for meat exports is significant in Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay and Colombia.
In tropical regions the most important crops are coffee, cocoa and bananas, mainly in Brazil, Colombia and Ecuador.
Traditionally, the countries producing sugar for export are Peru, Guyana and Suriname, and in Brazil, sugar cane is also used to make ethanol.
On the coast of Peru, northeast and south of Brazil, cotton is grown.
Transnational companies have settled in the Amazon rainforest to exploit timber destined for export.
The Pacific coastal waters are the most important for commercial fishing.
The anchovy catch reaches thousands of tonnes, and tuna is abundant, Peru is a major exporter.
The capture of crustaceans is large, particularly in northeastern Brazil and Chile.
Brazil and Argentina are part of the G20 industrial countries, while only Brazil is part of the G8+5 (the most powerful and influential nations in the world).
In the tourism sector, negotiations began in 2005 to promote tourism and increase air connections within the region.
Punta del Este, Florianópolis and Mar del Plata are among the largest resorts in South America.
The most industrialized countries in South America are Brazil, Argentina, Colombia and Chile respectively.
These countries alone account for more than 80% of the region's economy.
Industries in South America significantly developed from the 1930s, when the Great Depression in the United States and elsewhere, boosted industrial production on the continent.
The region partially moved away from agriculture and began to achieve high rates of economic growth that remained until the early 1990s, when they slowed due to political instabilities and economic crises.
Since the end of the economic crisis in Brazil and Argentina between 1998 and 2002, which led to economic recession, rising unemployment and falling income, the industrial and service sectors have recovered.
South America has shown good signs of economic stability, with controlled inflation and exchange rates, continuous growth, a decrease in social inequality and unemployment – factors that favor industry.
The main industries are: electronics, textiles, food, automotive, metallurgy, aviation, naval, clothing, beverage, steel, tobacco, timber, chemical, among others.
The economic gap between rich and poor in most South American nations is larger than most other continents.
The richest 10% receive over 40% of the nation's income in Bolivia, Brazil and Colombia, while the poorest 20% receive 4% or less.
This wide gap can be seen in large South American cities where makeshift shacks and slums lie in the vicinity of skyscrapers and luxury apartments; many South Americans live on less than $2 per day.
The four countries with the strongest agriculture are Brazil, Argentina, Chile and Colombia.
Paraguay's agriculture is currently developing, being currently the sixth largest producer of soy in the world and entering the list of the 20 largest producers of maize and sugarcane.
Brazil is the world's largest exporter of chicken meat: 3.
The country is the holder of the second largest herd of cattle in the world, 22% of the world herd.
The country was the second largest producer of beef in 2019, responsible for 15% of global production.
It was also the third largest world producer of milk in 2018, 35 billion liters.
In 2019, Brazil was the 4th largest pork producer in the world, with almost 4 million tonnes.
In 2018, Argentina was the fourth largest producer of beef in the world, with a production of 3 million tonnes (behind only the United States, Brazil and China).
In chicken meat production, Argentina ranks among the 15 largest producers in the world, and Peru and Colombia among the 20 biggest producers.
In beef production, Colombia is one of the 20 largest producers in the world.
In honey production, Argentina ranks among the five largest.
In cow's milk, Argentina ranks among the 20 largest producers.
The World Bank annually lists the top manufacturing countries by total manufacturing value.
According to the 2019 list, Brazil has the thirteenth most valuable industry in the world (US$174 billion), Venezuela the thirtieth largest (US$58.
Brazil has the third-largest manufacturing sector in the Americas.
Accounting for 29 percent of GDP, Brazil's industries range from automobiles, steel, and petrochemicals to computers, aircraft (Embraer), food, pharmaceutical, footwear, metallurgy and consumer durables.
In the food industry, in 2019, Brazil was the second largest exporter of processed foods in the world.
In 2016, the country was the 2nd largest producer of pulp and the 8th largest producer of paper.
In the footwear industry, in 2019, Brazil ranked 4th among world producers.
In 2019, the country was the 8th largest producer of vehicles and the 9th largest producer of steel in the world.
In 2018, the chemical industry of Brazil was the 8th largest in the world.
Although Brazil was in 2013 among the five largest producers of textiles in the world, its textile industry still lacks proper integration in the world trade.
Mining is one of the most important economic sectors in South America, especially for Chile, Peru and Bolivia, whose economies are highly dependent on this sector.
The continent is a large producer of gold (mainly in Peru, Brazil and Argentina); silver (mainly in Peru, Chile, Bolivia and Argentina); copper (mainly in Chile, Peru and Brazil); iron ore (Brazil, Peru and Chile); zinc (Peru, Bolivia and Brazil); molybdenum (Chile and Peru); lithium (Chile, Argentina and Brazil); lead (Peru and Bolivia); bauxite (Brazil); tin (Peru, Bolivia and Brazil); manganese (Brazil); antimony (Bolivia and Ecuador); nickel (Brazil); niobium (Brazil); rhenium (Chile); iodine (Chile), among others.
Brazil stands out in the extraction of iron ore (where it is the second largest producer and exporter in the world – iron ore is usually one of the three export products that generate the greatest value in the country's trade balance), copper, gold, bauxite (one of the five largest producers in the world), manganese (one of the five largest producers in the world), tin (one of the largest producers in the world), niobium (concentrates 98% of reserves known to the world) and nickel.
In terms of gemstones, Brazil is the world's largest producer of amethyst, topaz, agate and one of the main producers of tourmaline, emerald, aquamarine, garnet and opal.
Chile contributes about a third of the world copper production.
In addition to copper, Chile was, in 2019, the world's largest producer of iodine and rhenium, the second largest producer of lithium and molybdenum, the sixth largest producer of silver, the seventh largest producer of salt, the eighth largest producer of potash, the thirteenth largest producer of sulfur and the thirteenth largest producer of iron ore in the world.
In 2019, Peru was the 2nd largest world producer of copper and silver, 8th largest world producer of gold, 3rd largest world producer of lead, 2nd largest world producer of zinc, 4th largest world producer of tin, 5th largest world producer of boron and 4th largest world producer of molybdenum.
In 2019, Bolivia was the 8th largest world producer of silver; 4th largest world producer of boron; 5th largest world producer of antimony; 5th largest world producer of tin; 6th largest world producer of tungsten; 7th largest producer of zinc, and the 8th largest producer of lead.
In 2019, Argentina was the 4th largest world producer of lithium, the 9th largest world producer of silver, the 17th largest world producer of gold and the 7th largest world producer of boron.
Colombia is the world's largest producer of emeralds.
In the production of gold, among 2006 and 2017, the country produced 15 tonnes (15 long tons; 17 short tons) per year until 2007, when its production increased significantly, breaking a record of 66.
In 2017, it extracted 52.
The country is among the 25 largest gold producers in the world.
In the production of silver, in 2017 the country extracted 15.
In the production of oil, Brazil was the 10th largest oil producer in the world in 2019, with 2.
Venezuela was the 21st largest, with 877 thousand barrels / day and Colombia in 22nd with 886 thousand.
As Venezuela and Ecuador consume little oil and export most of their production, they are part of OPEC.
Venezuela had a big drop in production after 2015 (where it produced 2.
For natural gas, in 2018, Argentina produced 1524 bcf (billion cubic feet), Venezuela 946, Brazil 877, Bolivia 617, Peru 451, Colombia 379.
In the beginning of 2020, in the production of oil and natural gas, Brazil exceeded 4 million barrels of oil equivalent per day, for the first time.
The continent had 2 of the 30 largest world producers of coal in 2018: Colombia (12th) and Brazil (27th).
Tourism has increasingly become a significant source of income for South American countries.
Historic relics, architectural and natural wonders, a diverse range of foods and culture, colorful cities, and pretty landscapes attract millions of tourists every year to South America.
Isla Margarita, Angel Falls, Los Roques archipelago, Gran Sabana in Venezuela; Machu Picchu, Lima, Nazca Lines, Cuzco in Peru; Lake Titicaca, Salar de Uyuni, La Paz, Jesuit Missions of Chiquitos in Bolivia; Tayrona National Natural Park, Santa Marta, Bogotá, Cali, Medellín, Cartagena in Colombia, and the Galápagos Islands in Ecuador.
In 2016 Brazil hosted the 2016 Summer Olympics.
Due to the diversity of topography and pluviometric precipitation conditions, the region's water resources vary enormously in different areas.
In the Andes, navigation possibilities are limited, except for the Magdalena River, Lake Titicaca and the lakes of the southern regions of Chile and Argentina.
Irrigation is an important factor for agriculture from northwestern Peru to Patagonia.
Less than 10% of the known electrical potential of the Andes had been used until the mid-1960s.
The Brazilian Highlands have a much higher hydroelectric potential than the Andean region and its possibilities of exploitation are greater due to the existence of several large rivers with high margins and the occurrence of great differences forming huge cataracts, such as those of Paulo Afonso, Iguaçu and others.
The Amazon River system has about 13,000 km (8,100 mi) of waterways, but its possibilities for hydroelectric power use are still unknown.
Most of the continent's energy is generated through hydroelectric power plants, but there is also an important share of thermoelectric and wind energy.
Brazil and Argentina are the only South American countries that generate nuclear power, each with two nuclear power plants.
In 1991 these countries signed a peaceful nuclear cooperation agreement.
The Brazilian government has undertaken an ambitious program to reduce dependence on imported petroleum.
Imports previously accounted for more than 70% of the country's oil needs but Brazil became self-sufficient in oil in 2006–2007.
Brazil was the 10th largest oil producer in the world in 2019, with 2.
Production manages to supply the country's demand.
In the beginning of 2020, in the production of oil and natural gas, the country exceeded 4 million barrels of oil equivalent per day, for the first time.
In January this year, 3.
Brazil is one of the main world producers of hydroelectric power.
In 2019, Brazil had 217 hydroelectric plants in operation, with an installed capacity of 98,581 MW, that constitutes 60.
In 2019 Brazil reached a total of 170,000 megawatts of installed power generation capacity, of which more than 75% are from renewable sources (the majority, hydroelectric).
In 2013, the Southeast Region used about 50% of the load of the National Integrated System (SIN), being the main energy consuming region in the country.
The region's installed electricity generation capacity totaled almost 42,500 MW, which represented about a third of Brazil's generation capacity.
Hydroelectric generation represented 58% of the region's installed capacity, with the remaining 42% coming mostly from thermoelectric generation.
São Paulo accounted for 40% of this capacity; Minas Gerais for about 25%; Rio de Janeiro for 13.
The South Region owns the Itaipu Dam, which was the largest hydroelectric plant in the world for several years, until the inauguration of Three Gorges Dam in China.
It remains the second largest operating hydroelectric power generation capacity in the world.
Brazil is the co-owner of the Itaipu Plant with Paraguay: the dam is located on the Paraná River, located on the border between countries.
It has an installed generation capacity of 14 GW for 20 generating units of 700 MW each.
North Region has large hydroelectric plants, such as Belo Monte Dam and Tucuruí Dam, which produce much of the national energy.
Brazil's hydroelectric potential has not yet been fully exploited, so the country still has the capacity to build several renewable energy plants in its territory.
As of July 2022, according to ONS, total installed capacity of wind power was 22 GW, with average capacity factor of 58%.
While the world average wind production capacity factors is 24.
In 2019, wind energy represented 9% of the energy generated in the country.
In 2019, it was estimated that the country had an estimated wind power generation potential of around 522 GW (this, only onshore), enough energy to meet three times the country's current demand.
In 2021 Brazil ranked 7th in the world in terms of installed wind power capacity (21 GW), and the 4th largest producer of wind energy in the world (72 TWh), behind only China, United States and Germany.
Nuclear energy accounts for about 4% of Brazil's electricity.
The nuclear power generation monopoly is owned by Eletronuclear (Eletrobrás Eletronuclear S/A), a wholly owned subsidiary of Eletrobrás.
Nuclear energy is produced by two reactors at Angra.
It is located at the Central Nuclear Almirante Álvaro Alberto (CNAAA) on the Praia de Itaorna in Angra dos Reis, Rio de Janeiro.
It consists of two pressurized water reactors, Angra I, with capacity of 657 MW, connected to the power grid in 1982, and Angra II, with capacity of 1,350 MW, connected in 2000.
A third reactor, Angra III, with a projected output of 1,350 MW, is planned to be finished.
As of October 2022, according to ONS, total installed capacity of photovoltaic solar was 21 GW, with average capacity factor of 23%.
Some of the most irradiated Brazilian States are MG ("Minas Gerais"), BA ("Bahia") and GO (Goiás), which have indeed world irradiation level records.
In 2019, solar power represented 1.
In 2021, Brazil was the 14th country in the world in terms of installed solar power (13 GW), and the 11th largest producer of solar energy in the world (16.
In 2020, Brazil was the 2nd largest country in the world in the production of energy through biomass (energy production from solid biofuels and renewable waste), with 15,2 GW installed.
After Brazil, Colombia is the country in South America that most stands out in energy production.
In 2020, the country was the 20th largest petroleum producer in the world, and in 2015 it was the 19th largest exporter.
In natural gas, the country was, in 2015, the 40th largest producer in the world.
Colombia's biggest highlight is in coal, where the country was, in 2018, the world's 12th largest producer and the 5th largest exporter.
In renewable energies, in 2020, the country ranked 45th in the world in terms of installed wind energy (0.
Venezuela, which was one of the world's largest oil producers (about 2.
The country also stands out in hydroelectricity, where it was the 14th country in the world in terms of installed capacity in 2020 (16,5 GW).
Argentina was in 2017 the 18th largest producer of natural gas in the world, and the largest producer of natural gas in Latin America, in addition to being the 28th largest oil producer; although the country has the Vaca Muerta field, which holds close to 16 billion barrels of technically recoverable shale oil, which is the second largest natural shale gas deposit in the world, the country lacks the capacity to exploit the deposit: it lacks the necessary capital, technology and knowledge that can only come from offshore energy companies, who view Argentina and its erratic economic policies with considerable suspicion, not wanting to invest in the country.
In renewable energies, in 2020, the country ranked 27th in the world in terms of installed wind energy (2.
The country has great potential for the production of wind energy in the Patagonia region.
Chile, although currently not a major energy producer, has great future potential for solar energy production in the Atacama Desert region.
Paraguay stands out today in hydroelectric production thanks to the Itaipu Power Plant.
Bolivia stand out in the production of natural gas, where it was the 31st largest in the world in 2015.
Ecuador, because it consumes little energy, is part of OPEC and was the 27th largest oil producer in the world in 2020, being the 22nd largest exporter in 2014.
Transport infrastructure in South America includes roads, railways, seaports and airports.
The railway and fluvial sector, although having more robust contemporary potential, are still somewhat treated in a secondary way.
Due to the Andes Mountains, Amazon River and Amazon Forest, there have always been difficulties in implementing larger scale transcontinental or bi-oceanic highways.
Practically the only route that existed was the one that connected Brazil to Buenos Aires, (in Argentina) and later to Santiago, (in Chile).
However, in recent years, with the combined effort of countries, new routes have started to emerge, such as Brazil-Peru (Interoceanic Highway), and a new highway between Brazil, Paraguay, northern Argentina and northern Chile (Bioceanic Corridor).
Some of the most modern roads extend through northern and south-east Argentina; and south of Brazil, a vast road complex aims to link Brasília, the federal capital, to the South, Southeast, Northeast and Northern regions of Brazil.
Brazil has more than 1.
The two most important highways in the country are BR-101 and BR-116.
Argentina has more than 600,000 km (370,000 mi) of roads, of which about 70,000 km (43,000 mi) are paved, and about 2,500 km (1,600 mi) are divided highways.
The three most important highways in the country are Route 9, Route 7 and Route 14.
Colombia has about 210,000 km (130,000 mi) of roads, and about 2,300 km (1,400 mi) are divided highways.
Chile has about 82,000 km (51,000 mi) of roads, 20,000 km (12,000 mi) of which are paved, and about 2,000 km (1,200 mi) are divided highways.
The most important highway in the country is the Route 5 (Pan-American Highway).
These 4 countries are the ones with the best road infrastructure and with the largest number of double-lane highways.
In addition, there is a reputed Pan-American Highway, which crosses Argentina and the Andean countries from north to south, although various stretches are unfinished.
In South America, commercial aviation has a magnificent expansion field, which has one of the largest traffic density lines in the world, Rio de Janeiro–São Paulo, and large airports, such as Congonhas, São Paulo–Guarulhos International and Viracopos (São Paulo), Rio de Janeiro International and Santos Dumont (Rio de Janeiro), El Dorado (Bogotá), Ezeiza (Buenos Aires), Tancredo Neves International Airport (Belo Horizonte), Curitiba International Airport (Curitiba), Brasília, Caracas, Montevideo, Lima, Viru Viru International Airport (Santa Cruz de la Sierra), Recife, Salvador, Salgado Filho International Airport (Porto Alegre), Fortaleza, Manaus and Belém.
There are more than 2,000 airports in Brazil.
The country has the second largest number of airports in the world, behind only the United States.
São Paulo International Airport, located in the Metropolitan Region of São Paulo, is the largest and busiest in the country – the airport connects São Paulo to practically all major cities around the world.
Brazil has 44 international airports, such as those in Rio de Janeiro, Brasília, Belo Horizonte, Porto Alegre, Florianópolis, Cuiabá, Salvador, Recife, Fortaleza, Belém and Manaus, among others.
Argentina has important international airports such as Buenos Aires, Cordoba, Bariloche, Mendoza, Salta, Puerto Iguazú, Neuquén and Usuhaia, among others.
Chile has important international airports such as Santiago, Antofagasta, Puerto Montt, Punta Arenas and Iquique, among others.
Colombia has important international airports such as Bogotá, Medellín, Cartagena, Cali and Barranquilla, among others.
Other important airports are those in the capitals of Uruguay (Montevideo), Paraguay (Asunción), Peru (Lima), Bolivia (La Paz) and Ecuador (Quito).
The 10 busiest airports in South America in 2017 were: São Paulo-Guarulhos (Brazil), Bogotá (Colombia), São Paulo-Congonhas (Brazil), Santiago (Chile), Lima (Peru), Brasília (Brazil), Rio de Janeiro (Brazil), Buenos Aires-Aeroparque (Argentina), Buenos Aires-Ezeiza (Argentina), and Minas Gerais (Brazil).
The two main merchant fleets also belong to Brazil and Argentina.
The following are those of Chile, Venezuela, Peru and Colombia.
The largest ports in commercial movement are those of Buenos Aires, Santos, Rio de Janeiro, Bahía Blanca, Rosario, Valparaíso, Recife, Salvador, Montevideo, Paranaguá, Rio Grande, Fortaleza, Belém and Maracaibo.
Brazil has some of the busiest seaports in South America, such as Port of Santos, Port of Rio de Janeiro, Port of Paranaguá, Port of Itajaí, Port of Rio Grande, Port of São Francisco do Sul and Suape Port.
Argentina has ports such as Port of Buenos Aires and Port of Rosario.
Chile has important ports in Valparaíso, Caldera, Mejillones, Antofagasta, Iquique, Arica and Puerto Montt.
Colombia has important ports such as Buenaventura, Cartagena Container Terminal and Puerto Bolivar.
Peru has important ports in Callao, Chancay, Ilo and Matarani.
The 15 busiest ports in South America are: Port of Santos (Brazil), Port of Bahia de Cartagena (Colombia), Callao (Peru), Guayaquil (Ecuador), Buenos Aires (Argentina), San Antonio (Chile), Buenaventura (Colombia), Itajaí (Brazil), Valparaíso (Chile), Montevideo (Uruguay), Paranaguá (Brazil), Rio Grande (Brazil), São Francisco do Sul (Brazil), Manaus (Brazil) and Coronel (Chile).
Two primary railroads are continental: the Transandina, which connects Buenos Aires, in Argentina to Valparaíso, in Chile, and the Brazil–Bolivia Railroad, which makes it the connection between the port of Santos in Brazil and the city of Santa Cruz de la Sierra, in Bolivia.
Two areas of greater density occur in the railway sector: the platinum network, which develops around the Platine region, largely belonging to Argentina, with more than 45,000 km (28,000 mi) in length; And the Southeast Brazil network, which mainly serves the state of São Paulo, state of Rio de Janeiro and Minas Gerais.
The Argentine rail network, with 47,000 km (29,000 mi) of tracks, at one stage was one of the largest in the world and continues to be the most extensive in Latin America.
It came to have about 100,000 km (62,000 mi) of rails, but the lifting of tracks and the emphasis placed on motor transport gradually reduced it.
It has four different trails and international connections with Paraguay, Bolivia, Chile, Brazil and Uruguay.
The Brazilian railway network has an extension of about 30,000 kilometres (19,000 miles).
It is basically used for transporting ores.
Chile has almost 7,000 km (4,300 mi) of railways, with connections to Argentina, Bolivia and Peru.
Colombia has about 3,500 km (2,200 mi) of railways.
South America has one of the largest bays of navigable inland waterways in the world, represented mainly by the Amazon basin, the Platine basin, the São Francisco and the Orinoco basins, with Brazil having about 54,000 km (34,000 mi) navigable, while Argentina has 6,500 km (4,000 mi) and Venezuela has 1,200 km (750 mi).
Among the main Brazilian waterways, two stand out: the one is Hidrovia Tietê-Paraná—which has a length of 2,400 kilometres (1,500 miles), of which 1,600 kilometres (990 miles) are on the Paraná River and 800 kilometres (500 miles) are on the Tietê River—draining agricultural production from the states of Mato Grosso, Mato Grosso do Sul, Goiás and part of Rondônia, Tocantins and Minas Gerais; the second one is Hidrovia do Solimões-Amazonas with two sections: Solimões which extends from Tabatinga to Manaus with a length of approximately 1,600 kilometres (990 miles), and Amazonas which extends from Manaus to Belém with a length of approximately 1,650 kilometres (1,030 miles).
Almost all passenger transport in the Amazon plain is done via this waterway, in addition to practically all cargo transportation that is directed to the major regional centers of Belém and Manaus.
In Brazil, water transport is still underutilised: the most important waterway stretches, from an economic point of view, are found in the Southeast and South of the country.
Its full use still requires the construction of locks, major dredging works and the development of ports that allow intermodal integration.
In Argentina, the waterway network is made up of the La Plata, Paraná, Paraguay and Uruguay rivers.
The main river ports are Zárate and Campana.
The port of Buenos Aires is historically the first in individual importance, but the area known as Up-River, which stretches along 67 kilometres (42 miles) of the Santa Fé portion of the Paraná River, brings together 17 ports that concentrates around 50% of the total exports of the country.
The primary public transport in major cities is the bus.
Many cities have a diverse transport system of metro and subway trains, the first of which was the Buenos Aires subte, opened 1913.
The Santiago subway is the longest subway network in South America spanning 103 kilometres (64 miles), while the São Paulo subway is the most heavily utilised with more than 4.
Rio de Janeiro installed the continent's first railroad in 1854.
Today the city has a diversified system of metropolitan trains, integrated with buses and subway.
It has a Light Rail System called VLT, with small electrical trams at low speed, while São Paulo has inaugurated a monorail.
In Brazil, an express bus system called Bus Rapid Transit (BRT), which operates in several cities, has been developed.
Mi Teleférico, also known as Teleférico La Paz–El Alto (La Paz–El Alto Cable Car), is an aerial cable car urban transit system serving the La Paz–El Alto metropolitan area in Bolivia.
South America has a population of over 428 million people.
They are distributed as to form a "hollow continent" with most of the population concentrated around the margins of the continent.
On one hand, there are several sparsely populated areas such as tropical forests, the Atacama Desert and the icy portions of Patagonia.
On the other hand, the continent presents regions of high population density, such as the great urban centers.
The population is formed by descendants of Europeans (mainly Spaniards, Portuguese and Italians), Africans and Amerindians.
There is a high percentage of Mestizos that vary greatly in composition by place.
There is a population of about 5 million Asians, mostly East Asians, especially in Brazil, Peru, and Argentina.
The two main languages are by far Spanish and Portuguese, followed by English, French and Dutch in smaller numbers.
Spanish and Portuguese are the most spoken languages in South America, with approximately 200 million speakers each.
Spanish is the official language of most countries, along with other native languages in some countries.
Portuguese is the official language of Brazil.
Dutch is the official language of Suriname; English is the official language of Guyana, although there are at least twelve other languages spoken in the country, including Portuguese, Chinese, Hindustani and several native languages.
English is also spoken in the Falkland Islands.
French is the official language of French Guiana and the second language in Amapá, Brazil.
Indigenous languages of South America include Quechua in Peru, Bolivia, Ecuador, Chile, Argentina and Colombia; Wayuunaiki in northern Colombia (La Guajira) and northwestern Venezuela (Zulia); Guaraní in Paraguay and, to a much lesser extent, Bolivia; Aymara in Bolivia, Peru, and less often in Chile; and Mapudungun is spoken in certain pockets of southern Chile.
At least three South American indigenous languages (Quechua, Aymara, and Guarani) are recognized along with Spanish as national languages.
Other languages found in South America include Sranan Tongo, Hindustani and Javanese in Suriname; Italian in Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay and Venezuela; and German in certain pockets of Argentina, Chile and Brazil.
German is also spoken in many regions of the southern states of Brazil, Riograndenser Hunsrückisch being the most widely spoken German dialect in the country; among other Germanic dialects, a Brazilian form of East Pomeranian is also well represented and is experiencing a revival.
Welsh remains spoken and written in the historic towns of Trelew and Rawson in the Argentine Patagonia, Croatian is spoken in southern Chile, Arabic speakers, often of Lebanese, Syrian, or Palestinian descent, can be found in Arab communities in Argentina, Colombia, Brazil, Venezuela and in Paraguay.
An estimated 90% of South Americans are Christians (82% Roman Catholic, 8% other Christian denominations mainly traditional Protestants and Evangelicals but also Orthodox), accounting for 19% of Christians worldwide.
African descendant and Indigenous religions are common throughout South America; some examples are Santo Daime, Candomblé, and Umbanda.
Crypto-Jews or Marranos, conversos, and Anusim were an important part of colonial life in Latin America.
Buenos Aires and São Paulo figure among the largest Jewish populations by urban area.
East Asian religions such as Japanese Buddhism, Shintoism, and Shinto-derived Japanese New Religions are common in Brazil and Peru.
Korean Confucianism is especially found in Brazil, while Chinese Buddhism and Chinese Confucianism have spread throughout the continent.
Kardecist Spiritism can be found in several countries.
Hindus form 25% of the Guyanese population and 22% of Suriname's.
Muslims account for 7% of the Guyanese population and 14% of the Surinamese population.
Genetic admixture occurs at high levels in South America.
In Argentina, European influence accounts for 65–80% of the genetic background, Amerindian (indigenous people) 17–31% and sub-Saharan African 2–4%.
In Colombia, the sub-Saharan African genetic background varied 1% to 89%, while the European genetic background varied from 20 to 79%, depending on the region.
In Peru, Depending on the region, Peruvian regions can range from 10-20% (central) to 40-50% (north) of European ancestry.
The Genographic Project determined the average Peruvian from Lima had about 25% European ancestry, 68% Native American, 3% Southwest Asian ancestry and 2% sub-Saharan African.
According to a genetic research in 2020, Peruvian genetic admixture indicates 63,7% Amerindian, 29,6% European, 4,8% African ancestry and 2,9% Asian.
Descendants of indigenous peoples, such as the Quechua and Aymara, or the Urarina of Amazonia, make up the majority of the population in Bolivia (56%) and Peru (44%).
In Ecuador, Amerindians comprise two-fifths of the population.
The indigenous population is also a significant element in most other countries in South America.
People who identify as of primarily or totally European descent, or identify their phenotype as corresponding to such group, are a majority in Uruguay, Argentina and Chile (64.
In Venezuela, according to the census, 42% of the population is of primarily Spanish, Italian or Portuguese descendence.
In Colombia, people who identify as from European descendants are about 20%.
In Peru, European descendants are the third group in number (15%).
Mestizos (mixed European and Amerindian) are the largest ethnic group in Peru, Paraguay, Venezuela, Colombia and Ecuador and the second group in Bolivia , Chile and Argentina.
South America is home to one of the largest populations of Africans.
This group is significantly present in Brazil, Colombia, Guyana, Suriname, French Guiana, Venezuela and Ecuador.
Brazil, followed by Peru, has the largest Japanese, Korean and Chinese communities in South America.
Lima has the largest ethnic Chinese community in Latin America.
Guyana and Suriname have the largest ethnic East Indian community.
In some places indigenous people still practice a traditional lifestyle, based on subsistence agriculture or as hunter-gatherers.
There are still uncontacted tribes residing in the Amazon Rainforest.
While Brazil, Argentina, and Colombia maintain the largest populations, large city populations are not restricted to those nations.
Five of the top ten metropolitan areas are in Brazil.
These metropolitan areas all have a population of above 4 million and include the São Paulo metropolitan area, Rio de Janeiro metropolitan area, and Belo Horizonte metropolitan area.
Whilst the majority of the largest metropolitan areas are within Brazil, Argentina is host to the second largest metropolitan area by population in South America: the Buenos Aires metropolitan region, with a population in excess of 13 million.
South America has been witness to the growth of megapolitan areas.
In Brazil four megaregions exist including the Expanded Metropolitan Complex of São Paulo with more than 32 million inhabitants.
The others are the Greater Rio, Greater Belo Horizonte and Greater Porto Alegre.
Colombia also has four megaregions which comprise 72% of its population, followed by Venezuela, Argentina and Peru which are also homes of megaregions.
South Americans are culturally influenced by their indigenous peoples, the historic connection with the Iberian Peninsula and Africa, and waves of immigrants from around the globe.
South American nations have a rich variety of music.
Some of the most famous genres include vallenato and cumbia from Colombia, pasillo from Colombia and Ecuador, samba, bossa nova and música sertaneja from Brazil, joropo from Venezuela and tango from Argentina and Uruguay.
Also well known is the non-commercial folk genre Nueva Canción movement which was founded in Argentina and Chile and quickly spread to the rest of the Latin America.
People on the Peruvian coast created the fine guitar and cajon duos or trios in the most mestizo (mixed) of South American rhythms such as the Marinera (from Lima), the Tondero (from Piura), the 19th-century popular Creole Valse or Peruvian Valse, the soulful Arequipan Yaravi, and the early-20th-century Paraguayan Guarania.
In the late 20th century, Spanish rock emerged by young hipsters influenced by British pop and American rock.
Brazil has a Portuguese-language pop rock industry as well a great variety of other music genres.
In the central and western regions of Bolivia, Andean and folklore music like Diablada, Caporales and Morenada are the most representative of the country, which were originated by European, Aymara and Quechua influences.
The literature of South America has attracted considerable critical and popular acclaim, especially with the Latin American Boom of the 1960s and 1970s, and the rise of authors such as Mario Vargas Llosa, Gabriel García Márquez in novels and Jorge Luis Borges and Pablo Neruda in other genres.
The Brazilians Machado de Assis and João Guimarães Rosa are widely regarded as the greatest Brazilian writers.
Because of South America's broad ethnic mix, South American cuisine has African, Mestizo, South Asian, East Asian, and European influences.
Bahia, Brazil, is especially well known for its West African–influenced cuisine, while São Paulo's cuisine is a mix of caipira and European's cuisine, especially the Italian.
Argentines, Chileans, Uruguayans, Brazilians, Bolivians, and Venezuelans regularly consume wine.
People in Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay, southern Chile, Bolivia and Southern Brazil drink mate, an herb which is brewed.
The Paraguayan version, terere, differs from other forms of mate in that it is served cold.
Pisco is a liquor distilled from grapes in Peru and Chile.
Peruvian cuisine mixes elements from Chinese, Japanese, Spanish, Italian, African, Arab, Andean, and Amazonic food.
The artist Oswaldo Guayasamín (1919–1999) from Ecuador, represented with his painting style the feeling of the peoples of Latin America highlighting social injustices in various parts of the world.
The Colombian Fernando Botero (1932–2023) was one of the greatest exponents of painting and sculpture that was able to develop a recognizable style of his own.
For his part, the Venezuelan Carlos Cruz-Diez has contributed significantly to contemporary art, with the presence of works around the world.
Currently several emerging South American artists are recognized by international art critics: Guillermo Lorca, a Chilean painter, Teddy Cobeña, an Ecuadorian sculptor and recipient of international sculpture award in France, and Argentine artist Adrián Villar Rojas, winner of the Zurich Museum Art Award, among many others.
A wide range of sports are played in the continent of South America, with football being the most popular overall, while baseball is the most popular in Venezuela.
Other sports include basketball, cycling, polo, volleyball, futsal, motorsports, rugby (mostly in Argentina and Uruguay), handball, tennis, golf, field hockey, boxing, and cricket.
South America hosted its first Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in 2016, and has hosted the Youth Olympic Games in Buenos Aires, Argentina, in 2018.
A multi-sport event, the South American Games, are held every four years.
The first edition was held in La Paz in 1978 and the most recent took place in Santiago in 2014.
South America shares, with Europe, supremacy over football: all winners in the FIFA World Cup and FIFA Club World Cup have come from these two continents.
Brazil has won the FIFA World Cup a record five times; Argentina three times, Uruguay twice.
Five South American nations have hosted the tournament including the first edition in Uruguay (1930).
Two were in Brazil (1950, 2014), Chile (1962), and Argentina (1978).
South America is home to the longest-running international football tournament, the Copa América, which has been contested since 1916.
Argentina has won the Copa América 16 times, the most among all countries.
South American Cricket Championship is an international one-day cricket tournament played since 1995 featuring national teams from South America and certain other invited sides including teams from North America, currently played annually but until 2013 was usually played every two seasons.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY 4.
Text taken from Global Forest Resources Assessment 2025​, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
Encyclopædia Britannica.
Australia, officially the Commonwealth of Australia, is a country comprising the mainland of the Australian continent, the island of Tasmania and numerous smaller islands.
It has a land area of 7,688,287 km2 (2,968,464 sq mi), making it the sixth-largest country in the world.
Australia is the world's flattest and driest inhabited continent.
It is a megadiverse country, and its size gives it a wide variety of landscapes and climates including deserts in the interior and tropical rainforests along the coast.
The ancestors of Aboriginal Australians began arriving from Southeast Asia 50,000 to 65,000 years ago, during the Last Glacial Period.
By the time of British settlement, Aboriginal Australians spoke more than 250 distinct languages and had one of the oldest living cultures in the world.
Australia's written history commenced with Dutch exploration of most of the coastline in the 17th century.
British colonisation began in 1788 with the establishment of the penal colony of New South Wales.
By the mid-19th century, most of the continent had been explored by European settlers and five additional self-governing British colonies were established, each gaining responsible government by 1890.
The colonies federated in 1901, forming the Commonwealth of Australia.
This continued a process of increasing autonomy from the United Kingdom, highlighted by the Statute of Westminster Adoption Act 1942, and culminating in the Australia Acts of 1986.
Australia is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary democracy, and a federation comprising six states and ten territories.
Its population of almost 28 million is highly urbanised and heavily concentrated on the eastern seaboard.
Canberra is the nation's capital, while its most populous cities are Sydney and Melbourne, each with a population of more than five million.
Australia's culture is diverse, and the country has one of the highest foreign-born populations in the world.
It has a highly developed economy and one of the highest per capita incomes globally.
Its abundant natural resources and well-developed international trade relations are crucial to the country's economy.
It ranks highly for quality of life, health, education, economic freedom, civil liberties and political rights.
Australia is a middle power, and has the world's thirteenth-highest military expenditure.
It is a member of international groups including: the United Nations, the G20, the OECD, the World Trade Organization, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, the Pacific Islands Forum, the Pacific Community and the Commonwealth of Nations.
Australia also participates in the defence, intelligence and security alliances ANZUS, AUKUS and Five Eyes.
It is a major non-NATO ally of the United States.
The name Australia (pronounced in Australian English) is derived from the Latin Terra Australis Incognita ('unknown southern land'), a name used for a hypothetical continent in the Southern Hemisphere since ancient times.
Several 16th-century cartographers used the word Australia on maps, but not to identify modern Australia.
When the Dutch began visiting and mapping Australia in the 17th century, they called the continent New Holland.
The name Australia was popularised by the explorer Matthew Flinders, who circumnavigated the continent in 1803.
However, when his account of his voyage was published in 1814, the name Terra Australis was used.
Governor of New South Wales Lachlan Macquarie officially recommended the name Australia to replace New Holland in December 1817.
The British Admiralty adopted the name in 1824, and the British Parliament used it in legislation in 1828.
The United Kingdom Hydrographic Office used the new name in The Australia Directory of 1830.
The name "Commonwealth of Australia" for the new federation of the six former colonies was formalised in the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act 1900 (UK).
Colloquial names for Australia include "Oz", "Straya" and "Down Under".
Human habitation of the Australian continent is estimated to have begun 50,000 to 65,000 years ago, with the migration of people by land bridges and short sea crossings from what is now Southeast Asia.
It is uncertain how many waves of immigration may have contributed to these ancestors of modern Aboriginal Australians.
The Madjedbebe rock shelter in Arnhem Land is possibly the oldest site showing the presence of humans in Australia.
The oldest human remains found are the Lake Mungo remains, which have been dated to approximately 42,000 years ago.
Aboriginal Australian culture is one of the oldest continuous cultures on Earth.
At the time of first European contact, Aboriginal Australians belonged to wide range of societies, with diverse economies spread across at least 250 different language groups.
Estimates of the Aboriginal population before British settlement range from 300,000 to 3 million.
Aboriginal Australians cultures were (and remain) deeply connected with the land and the environment, with stories of The Dreaming maintained through oral tradition, songs, dance and paintings.
Certain groups engaged in fire-stick farming, fish farming, and built semi-permanent shelters.
These practices have variously been characterised as "hunter-gatherer", "agricultural", "natural cultivation" and "intensification".
Torres Strait Islander people first settled their islands at least 2,500 years ago.
Culturally and linguistically distinct from mainland Aboriginal peoples, they were seafarers and obtained their livelihood from seasonal horticulture and the resources of their reefs and seas.
Agriculture also developed on some islands and villages appeared by the 1300s.
By the mid-18th century in northern Australia, contact, trade and cross-cultural engagement had been established between local Aboriginal groups and Makassan trepangers, visiting from present-day Indonesia.
In 1606 the crew of the Dutch ship, Duyfken, captained by Willem Janszoon, made the first documented European landing in Australia and contact with Aboriginal Australians.
Later that year, Luís Vaz de Torres sailed to the north of Australia through Torres Strait, along New Guinea's southern coast.
Abel Tasman's voyage of 1642 was the first known European expedition to reach Van Diemen's Land.
On his second voyage of 1644, he mapped the north coast of Australia south of New Guinea.
Following Tasman's voyages, the Dutch were able to make almost complete maps of Australia's northern and western coasts and much of its southern and south-eastern Tasmanian coasts.
They named the continent New Holland.
In 1770, Captain James Cook sailed along and mapped the east coast, which he named "New South Wales" and claimed for Great Britain.
On 26 January 1788, the First Fleet commanded by Captain Arthur Phillip, arrived at Sydney Cove, Port Jackson.
A camp was established and the Union Flag raised.
The date later became Australia's national day.
Most early settlers were convicts, transported for petty crimes and assigned as labourers or servants to "free settlers" (willing immigrants).
Once emancipated, convicts tended to integrate into colonial society.
Aboriginal resistance, convict rebellions and bushranging were sometimes suppressed under martial law.
The 1808 Rum Rebellion, carried out by officers of the New South Wales Corp, led to a temporary military junta.
During the next two decades, social and economic reforms, together with the establishment of a Legislative Council and Supreme Court, saw the penal colony transition to a civil society.
The indigenous population declined for 150 years following European settlement, mainly due to infectious disease.
British colonial authorities did not sign any treaties with Aboriginal groups.
As settlement expanded, tens of thousands of Indigenous people and thousands of settlers were killed in frontier conflicts, which many historians argue included acts of genocide by settlers.
Settlers dispossessed surviving Indigenous peoples of most of their land.
In 1803, a settlement was established in Van Diemen's Land (present-day Tasmania), and in 1813, Gregory Blaxland, William Lawson and William Wentworth crossed the Blue Mountains west of Sydney, opening the interior to European settlement.
The British claim was extended to the whole Australian continent in 1827 when Major Edmund Lockyer established a settlement on King George Sound (modern-day Albany).
The Swan River Colony (present-day Perth) was established in 1829, evolving into the largest Australian colony by area, Western Australia.
Separate colonies were carved from New South Wales: Tasmania in 1825, South Australia in 1836, Victoria in 1851, and Queensland in 1859.
South Australia and Victoria were founded as free colonies – they never accepted transported convicts.
Growing opposition to the convict system culminated in its abolition in the eastern colonies by the 1850s.
Initially a free colony, Western Australia accepted convicts from 1850 to 1868.
The six colonies individually gained responsible government between 1855 and 1890, managing most of their own affairs while remaining part of the British Empire.
The Colonial Office in London retained control of some matters, notably foreign affairs.
The colonial parliaments progressively extended voting rights to adult men from 1856, with women's suffrage on equal terms following between the 1890s and 1900s.
Some colonies introduced racial restrictions on voting from 1885.
In the mid-19th century, explorers such as Burke and Wills charted Australia's interior.
A series of gold rushes beginning in the early 1850s led to an influx of new migrants from China, North America and continental Europe, as well as outbreaks of bushranging and civil unrest; the latter peaked in 1854 when Ballarat miners launched the Eureka Rebellion against gold licence fees.
The 1860s saw the rise of blackbirding, where South Sea Islanders were coerced or abducted into indentured labour, mainly by Queensland colonists.
From 1886, Australian colonial governments began removing many Aboriginal children from their families and communities, justified on the grounds of child protection and forced assimilation policies.
The Second Boer War (1899–1902) marked the largest overseas deployment of Australia's colonial forces.
On 1 January 1901, federation of the colonies was achieved after a decade of planning, constitutional conventions and referendums, resulting in the establishment of the Commonwealth of Australia as a nation under the new Australian Constitution.
From 1901, Australia was a self-governing dominion within the British Empire.
It was one of the founding members of the League of Nations in 1920, and the United Nations in 1945.
The Statute of Westminster 1931 ended the ability of the UK to legislate for Australia at the federal level without Australia's consent.
Australia adopted it in 1942, but it was backdated to 1939 to confirm the validity of legislation passed during World War II.
The Australian Capital Territory was formed in 1911 as the location for the future federal capital of Canberra.
While it was being constructed, Melbourne served as the temporary capital from 1901 to 1927.
The Northern Territory was transferred from the control of South Australia to the Commonwealth in 1911.
Australia took over the administration of the Territory of Papua (which had previously been a British colony) in 1905 and of the Territory of New Guinea (formerly German New Guinea) in 1920.
The two were unified as the Territory of Papua and New Guinea in 1949 and gained independence from Australia in 1975.
In 1914, Australia joined the Allies in the First World War, and took part in the fighting on several fronts.
Of the 324,000 men who served overseas, about 60,000 were killed and another 152,000 were wounded.
Many Australians regard the defeat of the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps (ANZAC) at Gallipoli in 1915 as the "baptism of fire" that forged the new nation's identity.
The beginning of the campaign is commemorated annually on Anzac Day, a date which rivals Australia Day as the nation's most important.
From 1939 to 1945, Australia joined the Allies in fighting the Second World War.
Australia's armed forces fought in the Pacific, European and Mediterranean and Middle East theatres.
The shock of Britain's defeat in Singapore in 1942, followed soon after by the bombing of Darwin and other Japanese attacks on Australian soil, led to a widespread belief in Australia that a Japanese invasion was imminent, and a shift from the United Kingdom to the United States as Australia's principal ally and security partner.
Since 1951, Australia has been allied with the United States under the ANZUS treaty.
In the three decades following World War II, Australia experienced significant increases in living standards, leisure time and suburban development.
Governments encouraged a large wave of immigration from across Europe and called these migrants "New Australians".
High immigration was justified to Australians using the slogan "populate or perish", and from the 1960s the white Australia policy was gradually relaxed.
A member of the Western Bloc during the Cold War, Australia participated in the Korean War and the Malayan Emergency during the 1950s and the Vietnam War from 1962 to 1973.
Tensions over communist influence in society led to unsuccessful attempts by the Menzies Government to ban the Communist Party of Australia, and a bitter split in the Labor Party in 1955.
As a result of a 1967 referendum, the federal government gained the power to legislate with regard to Aboriginal Australians, and Aboriginal Australians were fully included in the census.
Pre-colonial land interests (referred to as native title in Australia) was recognised in law for the first time when the High Court of Australia held in Mabo v Queensland (No 2) that Australia was not terra nullius ('land belonging to no one') at the time of European settlement.
Following the abolition of the last vestiges of the White Australia policy in 1973, Australia's demography and culture transformed as a result of a large and ongoing wave of non-European immigration, mostly from Asia.
The late 20th century also saw an increasing focus on foreign policy ties with other Asia–Pacific nations.
The Australia Acts of 1986 severed the remaining constitutional ties between Australia and the United Kingdom while maintaining the monarch in her independent capacity as Queen of Australia.
In a 1999 constitutional referendum, 55% of voters rejected abolishing the monarchy and becoming a republic.
Following the September 11 attacks on the United States, Australia joined the United States in fighting the Afghanistan War from 2001 to 2021 and the Iraq War from 2003 to 2009.
The nation's trade relations also became increasingly oriented towards East Asia in the 21st century, with China becoming the nation's largest trading partner by a large margin.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, from March 2020 lockdowns and other restrictions on public gatherings and movement across the national and state borders were implemented by the Federal, state and territory governments.
Following the rollout of vaccines in 2021, these restrictions were gradually eased.
In October 2023, Australia declared that COVID-19 was no longer a communicable disease incident of national significance.
Australia consists of the mainland Australian continent, the island of Tasmania, numerous smaller offshore islands, and the remote offshore territories of Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Christmas Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Coral Sea Islands, Heard and McDonald Islands, and Norfolk Island.
Australia also claims about 42% of Antarctica as the Australian Antarctic Territory, but this claim is only recognised by four other countries.
Mainland Australia lies between latitudes 9° and 44° south, and longitudes 112° and 154° east.
Surrounded by the Indian and Pacific oceans, Australia is separated from Asia by the Arafura and Timor seas, with the Coral Sea lying off the Queensland coast, and the Tasman Sea lying between Australia and New Zealand.
The Great Barrier Reef, the world's largest coral reef, lies a short distance off the north-east coast and extends for more than 2,300 km (1,400 mi).
The mainland is the world's smallest continent and the country is the sixth-largest by total area.
Australia is sometimes considered the world's largest island and is often dubbed the "island continent".
It has 35,877 km (22,293 mi) of coastline (excluding all offshore islands), and claims an exclusive economic zone of 8,148,250 square kilometres (3,146,060 sq mi).
This exclusive economic zone does not include the Australian Antarctic Territory.
Most of Australia is arid or semi-arid.
In 2021, Australia had 10% of the global permanent meadows and pastureland.
Forest cover is about 17% of Australia's land area.
The Australian mainland is relatively flat, with an average height of 325 metres (1,066 ft) compared with 870 metres (2,850 ft) for all continents.
The Great Dividing Range runs along most of eastern Australia, dividing the central lowlands from the eastern highlands.
At 2,228 m (7,310 ft), Mount Kosciuszko is the highest mountain on the mainland.
Taller are Mawson Peak, at 2,745 m (9,006 ft), on Heard Island, and, in the Australian Antarctic Territory, Mount McClintock and Mount Menzies, at 3,492 m (11,457 ft) and 3,355 m (11,007 ft) respectively.
The Murray-Darling is the major river system, draining most of inland New South Wales and Southern Queensland towards Lake Alexandrina and the sea in South Australia.
There are also smaller coastal river systems, inland drainage systems such as the Lake Eyre system, and salt lake systems in central and western Australia.
Australia's rivers have the lowest discharge into the sea of any continent.
The mainland's flat, arid profile also makes its rivers slow-moving, resulting in a build up of salt on the land.
Salinisation adversely affects Australia's soil which is, on average, poor in nutrients compared with world standards.
Australia's population is concentrated on the coastal fringes.
About 95% of the population lives within 100 km of the coast; the world average is 39%.
Australia's population density is 3.
However, there is a large concentration of the population in cities along the temperate south-eastern coastline, and population density exceeds 38 inhabitants per square kilometre in central Melbourne.
Formerly part of the Rodinia and Gondwana supercontinents, Australia completely separated from Antarctica about 35 million years ago and continued drifting northwards.
When the Last Glacial Period ended, rising sea levels separated the Australian mainland from New Guinea about 8,000 years ago and from Tasmania about 6,000 years ago.
Australia lies well within the Australian tectonic plate.
The mainland is relatively stable geologically, with no major mountain building, active volcanoes or tectonic faults.
However, the Australian plate is moving north-northeast at a rate of about 6 to 7 cm a year and is currently in collision with the Eurasian plate and Pacific plate.
The resulting intratectonic stresses lead to relatively high seismic activity for a geologically stable landmass.
There were 18 earthquakes with a moment magnitude of greater than 6 between 1901 and 2017.
The Newcastle earthquake of 1989 was Australia's deadliest, killing 13 people.
There were active volcanoes on the eastern mainland as recently as 4,600 years ago, and this is reflected in Aboriginal place names and creation stories.
Currently, volcanism occurs in the remote Heard Island and McDonald Islands.
The Australian continental crust was created in three cycles from the oldest Archaean cratons in the west to the younger orogenic formations in the east (built about 541 million to 252 million years ago).
The oldest Australian surface rocks date to the Archaean period.
Some in Western Australia are older than 3.
The oldest zircon crystals on Earth, dating back 4.
However, about 80 per cent of Australia is covered by sedimentary rocks and regolith that are less than 250 million years old.
The Australian climate ranges from wet tropical in the northeast and northwest to arid in the centre.
The coastal south is temperate and humid with winter freezing and snow in the southeastern highlands and Tasmania.
The climate is influenced by Australia's position in the "horse latitudes", which tends to bring arid conditions.
Overall, the Australian mainland is the driest inhabited continent, with an average annual rainfall of 470 millimetres (19 in).
About 70% of the country is arid or semi-arid, and about 18% is desert.
The climate is also influenced by various systems such as the El Niño–Southern Oscillation, the Indian Ocean Dipole and the Southern Annular Mode.
Australia has unusual variability in rainfall within years and between years, leading to frequent droughts and flooding.
Cyclones and rain depressions are common in tropical Australia.
The summer monsoon brings significant rainfall to northern Australia and low pressure cells bring winter rainfall in the south.
The hottest regions are in the northwest of the country and the coolest in the southeast.
Bushfire conditions are common in southern Australia.
Climate change from increased greenhouse gas emissions has led to a 1.
There has been a reduction in rainfall from April to October in southern Australia since 1970 and a longer bushfire season since the 1950s.
Rainfall has increased in northern Australia since the 1970s.
The number of tropical cyclones has fallen since 1982 and alpine snow has decreased since the late 1950s.
Sea levels are rising around Australia and the surrounding oceans are becoming more acidic.
Australia is one of 17 megadiverse countries.
Because of its long geographic isolation, much of Australia's biota is unique.
About 94% of its amphibians, 93% of its reptiles and flowering plants, 69% of its mammals and 46% of its birds are endemic.
Australia has a wide range of ecosystems of which 89 regions and 419 subregions are recognised in the Australian bioregion framework.
In January 2025, there were 168,386 named species on the Australian National Species List.
However, it is estimated that 70% of Australian species have not been discovered and classified and that there may be 600,000 Australian native species.
In general, knowledge of vertebrates and flowering plants is better than for invertebrates and fungi.
It is estimated that less that 10% of Australia's fungi and insects have been named.
About 10% of the world's known plant species are found in Australia.
Many of these have adapted to the arid climate, variable rainfall and nutrient-poor soil.
Deserts and xeric shrubland cover about 70% of the mainland.
Acacia, banksia and eucalypts have spread over much of Australia.
Many plants have hard and long-living leaves, and are rich in carbon, poor in nutrients, and well adapted to bushfires.
About two-thirds of the world's 330 species of marsupials are native to Australia.
Australian placental mammals (overwhelmingly bats, rats and mice) also make up almost 47% of the world's land mammal species.
Australia has about 10% of the world's known reptile species.
There are also about 320,500 invertebrate species, of which insects are the largest class, accounting for more than 75% of all animal species.
Australia has over 15,000 known species of fungi, although it is possible that tens of thousands more exist.
Australia's wildlife show many adaptations to their environments.
As the leaves of most plants are poor in nutrients, Australia has a high proportion of birds, insects and marsupials, such as the honey possum, that feed on nectar and pollen.
The koala is an exception, specialising in feeding on eucalyptus leaves.
Nutritionally poor flora and variable rainfall also favour animals with lower energy requirements, including snakes, lizards, and hopping marsupials such as the kangaroo and wallaby.
There is, however, evidence of convergent evolution of Australia's marsupials and the placental mammals of other continents living in similar environments.
For example, the extinct thylacine (Tasmanian tiger) had similarities with the placental wolf, marsupial moles with the golden moles of Africa, and hopping mice with the hopping rodents of other arid regions.
There were major extinctions of Australia's vertebrates, including its megafauna, about 46 thousand years ago, and there is an ongoing scientific debate over the role of human activity and climate change in these extinctions.
The contraction of the range of the Tasmanian tiger and Tasmanian devil to that island about 4,000 to 5,000 years ago is also consistent with changes on the mainland including an increasing human population, the introduction of the dingo, and the greater use of fire and new stone tool technologies.
Over the past two centuries, Australia has lost more mammal species than any other continent.
Overall, 100 Australian species are listed as extinct or extinct in the wild.
In June 2021, over 1,000 animal and plant species were listed by Australian governments as endangered or critically endangered.
The major threats to endangered species are landscape change, ecosystem disruption, introduced species such as the feral cat and red fox, and climate change.
The federal Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 is the legal framework for the protection of threatened species.
The National Reserve System is Australia's network of protected areas.
As at 30 June 2022, it covered over 22% of Australia's land mass.
Australia's Strategy for Nature 2024–2030 is the national biodiversity plan that aims to reverse biodiversity loss in Australia by 2030 and meet the county's obligations under the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity and other international agreements.
Australia is a constitutional monarchy, a parliamentary democracy and a federation.
The country has maintained its mostly unchanged constitution alongside a stable liberal democratic political system since Federation in 1901.
It is one of the world's oldest federations, in which power is divided between the federal and state governments.
The Australian system of government combines elements derived from the political systems of the United Kingdom (a fused executive, constitutional monarchy and strong party discipline) and the United States (federalism, a written constitution and strong bicameralism with a Senate in which states have equal representation), resulting in a distinct hybrid.
Following elections on 3 May 2025, the prime minister is Anthony Albanese of the Australian Labor Party.
Charles III reigns as King of Australia and is represented in Australia by the governor-general at the federal level and by the governors at the state level, who by section 63 of the Constitution and convention act on the advice of their ministers.
Thus, in practice the governor-general acts as a legal figurehead for the actions of the prime minister and the Cabinet.
The governor-general may in some situations exercise reserve powers: powers exercisable in the absence of, or contrary to, ministerial advice.
When these powers may be exercised is governed by convention and their precise scope is unclear.
The most notable exercise of these powers was the dismissal of the Whitlam government in the constitutional crisis of 1975.
In the Senate (the upper house), there are 76 senators: twelve each from the states and two each from the mainland territories (the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory).
The House of Representatives (the lower house) has 150 members elected from single-member electoral divisions, commonly known as "electorates" or "seats", allocated to states on the basis of population, with each of the current states guaranteed a minimum of five seats.
The lower house has a maximum term of three years, but this is not fixed and governments usually dissolve the house early for an election at some point in the 6 months before the maximum.
Elections for both chambers are generally held simultaneously with senators having overlapping six-year terms except for those from the territories, whose terms are not fixed but are tied to the electoral cycle for the lower house.
Thus, only 40 of the 76 places in the Senate are put to each election unless the cycle is interrupted by a double dissolution.
Australia's electoral system uses preferential voting for the House of Representatives and all state and territory lower house elections (with the exception of Tasmania and the ACT which use the Hare-Clark system).
The Senate and most state upper houses use the proportional system which combines preferential voting with proportional representation for each state.
Voting and enrolment is compulsory for all enrolled citizens 18 years and older in every jurisdiction.
The party with majority support in the House of Representatives forms the government and its leader becomes prime minister.
The governor-general appoints the prime minister and may dismiss one who has lost the confidence of parliament or acts illegally.
As Australia is a Westminster parliamentary democracy with a powerful and elected upper house, its system has sometimes been called a "Washminster mutation", or semi-parliamentary.
There are two major political groups that have usually formed government federally: the Australian Labor Party and the Coalition which is a grouping of the Liberal Party and its minor partner, the National Party.
At the state level of government, the relationship between the Nationals and the Liberal Party differs, with the parties merged in Queensland and the Northern Territory (federal parliamentarians, however, sit in either the Liberal or National party room); in coalition in New South Wales, Victoria and Western Australia; and in competition with the Liberals in South Australia and Tasmania.
Within Australian political culture, the Labor Party is considered centre-left and the Coalition is considered centre-right.
Independent members and several minor parties have achieved representation in Australian parliaments, mostly in upper houses.
The Australian Greens have been the third largest party by both vote and membership since 2004.
Australia has six states – New South Wales (NSW), Victoria (Vic), Queensland (Qld), Western Australia (WA), South Australia (SA) and Tasmania (Tas) – and two mainland self-governing territories – the Australian Capital Territory (ACT) and the Northern Territory (NT).
The states have the general power to make laws except in the few areas where the constitution grants the Commonwealth (the federal level of government) exclusive powers.
The Commonwealth can only make laws on topics listed in the constitution but its laws prevail over those of the states to the extent of any inconsistency.
Since Federation, the Commonwealth's power relative to the states has significantly increased due to the increasingly wide interpretation given to listed Commonwealth powers – and because of the states' heavy financial reliance on Commonwealth grants.
Each state and major mainland territory has its own parliament – unicameral in the Northern Territory, the ACT and Queensland, and bicameral in the other states.
The lower houses are known as the Legislative Assembly (the House of Assembly in South Australia and Tasmania); the upper houses are known as the Legislative Council.
The head of the government in each state is the premier and in each territory the chief minister.
The King is represented in each state by a governor.
At the Commonwealth level, the King's representative is the governor-general.
The Commonwealth government directly administers the internal Jervis Bay Territory and the external territories: the Ashmore and Cartier Islands, the Coral Sea Islands, the Heard Island and McDonald Islands, the Indian Ocean territories (Christmas Island and the Cocos (Keeling) Islands), Norfolk Island, and the Australian Antarctic Territory.
The remote Macquarie Island and Lord Howe Island are part of Tasmania and New South Wales respectively.
Australia is a middle power, whose foreign relations has three core bi-partisan pillars: commitment to the US alliance, engagement with the Indo-Pacific and support for international institutions, rules and co-operation.
Through the ANZUS pact and its status as a major non-NATO ally, Australia maintains a close relationship with the US, which encompasses strong defence, security and trade ties.
In the Indo-Pacific, the country seeks to increase its trade ties through the open flow of trade and capital, while managing the rise of Chinese power by supporting the existing rules-based order.
Regionally, the country is a member of the Pacific Islands Forum, the Pacific Community, the ASEAN+6 mechanism and the East Asia Summit.
Internationally, the country is a member of the United Nations (of which it was a founding member), the Commonwealth of Nations, the OECD and the G20.
This reflects the country's generally strong commitment to multilateralism.
Australia is a member of several defence, intelligence and security groupings including the Five Eyes intelligence alliance with the United States, United Kingdom, Canada and New Zealand; the ANZUS alliance with the United States and New Zealand; the AUKUS security treaty with the United States and United Kingdom; the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue with the United States, India and Japan; the Five Power Defence Arrangements with New Zealand, the United Kingdom, Malaysia and Singapore; and the Reciprocal Access defence and security agreement with Japan.
Australia has pursued the cause of international trade liberalisation.
It led the formation of the Cairns Group and Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, and is a member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the World Trade Organization (WTO).
Beginning in the 2000s, Australia entered into the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership multilateral free trade agreements as well as bilateral free trade agreements with the United States, China, Japan, South Korea, Indonesia, the United Kingdom and New Zealand, with the most recent deal signed in 2023 with the UK.
Australia maintains a deeply integrated relationship with neighbouring New Zealand, with free mobility of citizens between the two countries under the Trans-Tasman Travel Arrangement and free trade under the Closer Economic Relations agreement.
The most favourably viewed countries by the Australian people in 2021 include New Zealand, the United Kingdom, Japan, Germany, Taiwan, Thailand, the United States and South Korea.
It also maintains an international aid program under which some 75 countries receive assistance.
Australia ranked fourth in the Center for Global Development's 2021 Commitment to Development Index.
The power over foreign policy is highly concentrated in the prime minister and the national security committee, with major decision such as joining the 2003 invasion of Iraq made without prior Cabinet approval.
Similarly, the Parliament does not play a formal role in foreign policy and the power to declare war lies solely with the executive government.
The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade supports the executive in its policy decisions.
The two main institutions involved in the management of Australia's armed forces are the Australian Defence Force (ADF) and the Department of Defence, together known as "Defence".
The Australian Defence Force is the military wing, headed by the chief of the defence force, and contains three branches: the Royal Australian Navy, the Australian Army and the Royal Australian Air Force.
In 2021, it had 84,865 currently serving personnel (including 60,286 regulars and 24,581 reservists).
The Department of Defence is the civilian wing and is headed by the secretary of defence.
These two leaders collective manage Defence as a diarchy, with shared and joint responsibilities.
The titular role of commander-in-chief is held by the governor-general; however, actual command is vested in the chief of the Defence Force.
The executive branch of the Commonwealth government has overall control of the military through the minister of defence, who is subject to the decisions of Cabinet and its National Security Committee.
Major Australian intelligence agencies include the Australian Secret Intelligence Service (foreign intelligence), the Australian Signals Directorate (signals intelligence) and the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (domestic security).
In 2022, defence spending was 1.
In 2024, the ADF had active operations in the Middle East and the Indo-Pacific (including security and aid provisions); was contributing to UN forces in relation to South Sudan, Syria–Israel peacekeeping, and North Korea; and domestically was assisting in natural disaster relief and assisting in preventing asylum-seekers from entering the country.
Australia has generally strong protections for civil and political rights, and the country has signed up to a wide range of international rights treaties.
Important documents protecting human rights include the Constitution, the Racial Discrimination Act 1975, the Sex Discrimination Act 1984, the Disability Discrimination Act 1992, and the Age Discrimination Act 2004.
Same-sex marriage has been legal in the nation since 2017.
Unlike other comparable Western democracies, Australia does not have a single federal charter of rights in the Constitution or under legislation; however, the ACT, Victoria, and Queensland have state-based ones.
International organisations such as Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International have expressed concerns in areas including asylum-seeker policy, Indigenous deaths in custody, the lack of entrenched rights protection, and laws restricting protesting.
Australia's mixed-market economy is highly developed and rich in natural resources.
It is the world's fourteenth-largest by nominal terms, and the 18th-largest by PPP.
As of 2021, Australia has the second-highest amount of wealth per adult, after Luxembourg, and the thirteenth-highest financial assets per capita, as well as one of the highest per capita incomes globally.
It has a labour force of some 13.
According to the Australian Council of Social Service, the poverty rate of Australia exceeds 13.
It also estimated that there were 774,000 (17.
The Australian dollar is the national currency, which is also used by three island states in the Pacific: Kiribati, Nauru, and Tuvalu.
Australian government debt, about $963 billion in June 2022, exceeds 45.
Australia had the second-highest level of household debt in the world in 2020, after Switzerland.
Its house prices are among the highest in the world, especially in the large urban areas.
The large service sector accounts for about 71.
Australia is the world's 21st-largest exporter and 24th-largest importer.
China is Australia's largest trading partner, accounting for roughly 40% of the country's exports and 17.
Other major export markets include Japan, the United States, and South Korea.
Australia has high levels of competitiveness and economic freedom, and was ranked tenth in the Human Development Index in 2022.
As of 2022, it is ranked twelfth in the Index of Economic Freedom.
The 2021 Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report ranked Australia seventh-highest in the world out of 117 countries.
Its international tourism receipts in 2019 amounted to $45.
In 2021–22, Australia's generation of electricity was sourced from black coal (37.
Total consumption of energy in this period was sourced from coal (28.
From 2012 to 2022, the energy sourced from renewables has increased 5.
The use of gas also increased by 1.
In 2020, Australia produced 27.
A new target of 82% renewable energy by 2030 was set in 2022 and a target for net zero emissions by 2050 was set in 2021.
In 2019, Australia spent $35.
A 2022 study by the industry lobby group, The Tech Council of Australia, stated that the Australian technology sector combined contributes $167 billion a year to the economy and employs 861,000 people.
In 2022, startup ecosystems in Sydney and Melbourne were valued at $34 billion.
Australia ranked 22nd in the Global Innovation Index 2025.
CSIRO, Australia's national science agency, contributes 10% of all research in the country, while the rest is carried out by universities.
Australian achievements include the invention of atomic absorption spectroscopy, the essential components of Wi-Fi technology, and the development of the first commercially successful polymer banknote.
As of 2026, 14 Australian scientists have been awarded the Nobel Prize in physics, chemistry or medicine, and two have been awarded the Fields Medal.
Facilities supporting space exploration include the Square Kilometre Array and Australia Telescope Compact Array radio telescopes, telescopes such as the Siding Spring Observatory, and ground stations such as the Canberra Deep Space Communication Complex.
The population of Australia is estimated to be 27,724,744 as of September 2025.
It is the 54th most populous country in the world and the most populous Oceanian country.
Australia has a population density of 3.
The population is heavily concentrated on the east coast, and in particular in the south-eastern region between South East Queensland to the north-east and Adelaide to the south-west.
Australia is also highly urbanised, with 67% of the population living in the Greater Capital City Statistical Areas (metropolitan areas of the state and mainland territorial capital cities) in 2018.
Metropolitan areas with more than one million inhabitants are Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth and Adelaide.
In common with many other developed countries, Australia is experiencing a demographic shift towards an older population, with more retirees and fewer people of working age.
In 2021, the average age of the population was 39 years.
Australia has five cities (including their suburbs) that have populations larger than one million people.
The majority of Australia's population lives near coastlines.
Between 1788 and the Second World War, the vast majority of settlers and immigrants came from the British Isles (principally England, Ireland and Scotland), although Australia had significant immigration from China and Germany during the 19th century.
Following Federation in 1901, the white Australia policy was strengthened, restricting further migration from these areas.
However, this policy was relaxed following WW2, and in the decades following, Australia received a large wave of immigration from across Europe, with many more immigrants arriving from Southern and Eastern Europe than in previous decades.
Following the end of the White Australia policy in 1973, Australia adopted multiculturalism as policy, culminating in the Racial Discrimination Act 1975.
Subsequently, there has been a large and continuing wave of immigration from across the world, with Asia being the largest source of immigrants in the 21st century.
Today, Australia has the world's eighth-largest immigrant population, with immigrants accounting for 30% of the population, the highest proportion among major Western nations.
In 2022–23, 212,789 permanent migrants were admitted to Australia, with a net migration population gain of 518,000 people inclusive of non-permanent residents.
Most entered on skilled visas, however the immigration program also offers visas for family members and refugees.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics asks each Australian resident to nominate up to two ancestries each census and the responses are classified into broad ancestry groups.
At the 2021 census, the most commonly nominated ancestry groups as a proportion of the total population were: 57.
At the 2021 census, 3.
English has no legal status in Australia but it is the de facto official and national language due to its widespread established use.
Australian English is a major variety of the language with a distinctive accent and lexicon, and differs slightly from other varieties of English in grammar and spelling.
General Australian serves as the standard dialect.
The Australian sign language known as Auslan was used at home by 16,242 people at the time of the 2021 census.
At the 2021 census, English was the only language spoken in the home for 72% of the population.
The next most common languages spoken at home were Mandarin (2.
More than 250 Australian Aboriginal languages are thought to have existed at the time of first European contact.
The National Indigenous Languages Survey (NILS) for 2018–19 found that more than 120 Indigenous language varieties were in use or being revived, although 70 of those in use were endangered.
The 2021 census found that 167 Indigenous languages were spoken at home by 76,978 Indigenous Australians – Yumplatok (Torres Strait Creole), Djambarrpuyngu (a Yolŋu language) and Pitjantjatjara (a Western Desert language) were among the most widely spoken.
NILS and the Australian Bureau of Statistics use different classifications for Indigenous Australian languages.
However, the states still retain the power to pass religiously discriminatory laws.
At the 2021 census, 38.
The largest religion is Christianity (43.
The largest Christian denominations are the Catholic Church (20% of the population) and the Anglican Church of Australia (9.
Non-British immigration since the Second World War has led to the growth of non-Christian religions, the largest of which are Islam (3.
In 2021, just under 8,000 people declared an affiliation with traditional Aboriginal religions.
In Australian Aboriginal mythology and the animist framework developed in Aboriginal Australia, the Dreaming is a sacred era in which ancestral totemic spirit beings formed The Creation.
The Dreaming established the laws and structures of society and the ceremonies performed to ensure continuity of life and land.
Australia's life expectancy of 83 years (81 years for males and 85 years for females) is the fifth-highest in the world.
It has the highest rate of skin cancer in the world, while cigarette smoking is the largest preventable cause of death and disease, responsible for 7.
Ranked second in preventable causes is hypertension at 7.
Australia ranked 35th in the world in 2012 for its proportion of obese women and near the top of developed nations for its proportion of obese adults; 63% of its adult population is either overweight or obese.
Australia spent about 9.
It introduced a national insurance scheme in 1975.
Following a period in which access to the scheme was restricted, the scheme became universal once more in 1981 under the name of Medicare.
The program is nominally funded by an income tax surcharge known as the Medicare levy, currently at 2%.
The states manage hospitals and attached outpatient services, while the Commonwealth funds the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (subsidising the costs of medicines) and general practice.
School attendance, or registration for home schooling, is compulsory throughout Australia.
Education is primarily the responsibility of the individual states and territories; however, the Commonwealth has significant influence through funding agreements.
Since 2014, a national curriculum developed by the Commonwealth has been implemented by the states and territories.
Attendance rules vary between states, but in general children are required to attend school from the age of about 5 until about 16.
In some states (Western Australia, Northern Territory and New South Wales), children aged 16–17 are required to either attend school or participate in vocational training, such as an apprenticeship.
According to the 2022 PISA evaluations, Australian 15-year-olds ranked ninth in the OECD for reading and science and tenth for maths.
However, less than 60% of Australian students achieved the National Proficiency Standard – 51% in maths, 58% in science and 57% in reading.
Australia has an adult literacy rate that was estimated to be 99% in 2003.
However, a 2011–2012 report for the Australian Bureau of Statistics found that 44% of the population does not have high literary and numeracy competence levels, interpreted by others as suggesting that they do not have the "skills needed for everyday life".
Australia has 37 government-funded universities and three private universities, as well as a number of other specialist institutions that provide approved courses at the higher education level.
The OECD places Australia among the most expensive nations to attend university.
There is a state-based system of vocational training, known as TAFE, and many trades conduct apprenticeships for training new tradespeople.
About 58% of Australians aged from 25 to 64 have vocational or tertiary qualifications and the tertiary graduation rate of 49% is the highest among OECD countries.
Australia has the highest ratio of international students per head of population in the world by a large margin, with 812,000 international students enrolled in the nation's universities and vocational institutions in 2019.
Accordingly, in 2019, international students represented on average 26.
International education therefore represents one of the country's largest exports and has a pronounced influence on the country's demographics, with a significant proportion of international students remaining in Australia after graduation on various skill and employment visas.
Education is Australia's third-largest export, after iron ore and coal, and contributed more than $28 billion to the economy in the 2016–17 financial year.
Contemporary Australian culture is diverse and reflects the country's Indigenous traditions, British and Irish heritage, and post-1945 history of multicultural immigration.
The culture of the United States has also been influential.
The evolution of Australian culture since British colonisation has given rise to distinctive cultural traits.
Many Australians identify egalitarianism, mateship, irreverence and a lack of formality as part of their national identity.
These find expression in Australian slang, as well as Australian humour, which is often characterised as dry, irreverent and ironic.
New citizens and visa holders are required to commit to "Australian values", which are identified by the Department of Home Affairs as including: a respect for the freedom of the individual; recognition of the rule of law; opposition to racial, gender and religious discrimination; and an understanding of the "fair go", which is said to encompass the equality of opportunity for all and compassion for those in need.
What these values mean, and whether Australians uphold them, has been debated since before Federation.
Australia has more than 100,000 Aboriginal rock art sites, and traditional designs, patterns and stories infuse contemporary Indigenous Australian art, "the last great art movement of the 20th century" according to critic Robert Hughes; its exponents include Emily Kame Kngwarreye.
Early colonial artists showed a fascination with the unfamiliar land.
The impressionistic works of Arthur Streeton, Tom Roberts and other members of the 19th-century Heidelberg School – the first "distinctively Australian" movement in Western art – gave expression to nationalist sentiments in the lead-up to Federation.
While the school remained influential into the 1900s, modernists such as Margaret Preston and Clarice Beckett, and, later, Sidney Nolan, explored new artistic trends.
The landscape remained central to the work of Aboriginal watercolourist Albert Namatjira, as well as Fred Williams, Brett Whiteley and other post-war artists whose works, eclectic in style yet uniquely Australian, moved between the figurative and the abstract.
Australian literature grew slowly in the decades following European settlement though Indigenous oral traditions, many of which have since been recorded in writing, are much older.
In the 19th century, Henry Lawson and Banjo Paterson captured the experience of the bush using a distinctive Australian vocabulary.
Their works are still popular; Paterson's bush poem "Waltzing Matilda" (1895) is regarded as Australia's unofficial national anthem.
Miles Franklin is the namesake of Australia's most prestigious literary prize, awarded annually to the best novel about Australian life.
Its first recipient, Patrick White, went on to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1973.
Australian Booker Prize winners include Peter Carey, Thomas Keneally and Richard Flanagan.
Australian public intellectuals have also written seminal works in their respective fields, including feminist Germaine Greer and philosopher Peter Singer.
In the performing arts, Aboriginal peoples have traditions of religious and secular song, dance and rhythmic music often performed in corroborees.
At the beginning of the 20th century, Nellie Melba was one of the world's leading opera singers, and later popular music acts such as the Bee Gees, AC/DC, INXS and Kylie Minogue achieved international recognition.
Many of Australia's performing arts companies receive funding through the Australian government's Australia Council.
There is a symphony orchestra in each state, and a national opera company, Opera Australia, well known for its famous soprano Joan Sutherland.
Ballet and dance are represented by The Australian Ballet and various state companies.
Each state has a publicly funded theatre company.
The Story of the Kelly Gang (1906), the world's first feature-length narrative film, spurred a boom in Australian cinema during the silent film era.
After World War I, Hollywood monopolised the industry, and by the 1960s, Australian film production had effectively ceased.
With the benefit of government support, the Australian New Wave of the 1970s brought provocative and successful films, many exploring themes of national identity, such as Picnic at Hanging Rock, Wake in Fright and Gallipoli, while Crocodile Dundee and the Ozploitation movement's Mad Max series became international blockbusters.
In a film market flooded with foreign content, Australian films delivered a 7.
The AACTAs are Australia's premier film and television awards, and notable Academy Award winners from Australia include Geoffrey Rush, Nicole Kidman, Cate Blanchett and Heath Ledger.
Australia has two public broadcasters (the Australian Broadcasting Corporation and the multicultural Special Broadcasting Service), three commercial television networks, several pay-TV services, and numerous public, non-profit television and radio stations.
Each major city has at least one daily newspaper, and there are two national daily newspapers, The Australian and The Australian Financial Review.
In 2024, Reporters Without Borders placed Australia 39th on a list of 180 countries ranked by press freedom, behind New Zealand (19th) and the United Kingdom (23rd), but ahead of the United States (55th).
This relatively low ranking is primarily because of the limited diversity of commercial media ownership in Australia; most print media are under the control of News Corp Australia (59%) and Nine Entertainment (23%).
Most Indigenous Australian groups subsisted on a diet of native fauna and flora, otherwise called bush tucker.
It has increased in popularity among non-Indigenous Australians since the 1970s, with examples such as lemon myrtle, the macadamia nut and kangaroo meat now widely available.
The first colonists introduced British and Irish cuisine to the continent.
This influence is seen in dishes such as fish and chips, and in the Australian meat pie, which is related to the British steak pie.
Also during the colonial period, Chinese migrants paved the way for a distinctive Australian Chinese cuisine.
Post-war migrants transformed Australian cuisine, bringing with them their culinary traditions and contributing to new fusion dishes.
Italians introduced espresso coffee and, along with Greeks, helped develop Australia's café culture, of which the flat white and avocado toast are now considered Australian staples.
Pavlovas, lamingtons, Vegemite and Anzac biscuits are also often called iconic Australian foods.
Australia is a leading exporter and consumer of wine.
Australian wine is produced mainly in the southern, cooler parts of the country.
The nation also ranks highly in beer consumption, with each state and territory hosting numerous breweries.
The most popular sports in Australia by adult participation are: swimming, athletics, cycling, soccer, golf, tennis, basketball, surfing, netball and cricket.
Australia is one of five nations to have participated in every Summer Olympics of the modern era, and has hosted the Games twice: 1956 in Melbourne and 2000 in Sydney.
It is also set to host the 2032 Games in Brisbane.
Australia has also participated in every Commonwealth Games, hosting the event in 1938, 1962, 1982, 2006 and 2018.
The Australian national cricket team competed against England in both the first Test match (1877) and the first One Day International (1971), and against New Zealand in the first Twenty20 International (2004), winning all three games.
It has also won the men's Cricket World Cup a record six times.
Australia has professional leagues for four football codes, whose relative popularity is divided geographically.
Originating in Melbourne in the 1850s, Australian rules football attracts the most television viewers in all states except New South Wales and Queensland, where rugby league holds sway, followed by rugby union.
Soccer, while ranked fourth in television viewers and resources, has the highest overall participation rates.
The surf lifesaving movement originated in Australia in the early 20th century, following the relaxation of laws prohibiting daylight bathing on Australian beaches.
The volunteer lifesaver is one of the country's icons.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY-SA IGO 3.
Text taken from World Food and Agriculture – Statistical Yearbook 2023​, FAO, FAO.
Technology is the application of conceptual knowledge to achieve practical goals, especially in a reproducible way.
The word technology can also mean the products resulting from such efforts, including both tangible tools such as utensils or machines, and intangible ones such as software.
Technology plays a critical role in science, engineering, and everyday life.
Technological advancements have led to significant changes in society.
The earliest known technology is the stone tool, used during prehistory, followed by the control of fire—which in turn contributed to the growth of the human brain and the development of language during the Ice Age, according to the cooking hypothesis.
The invention of the wheel in the Bronze Age allowed greater travel and the creation of more complex machines.
More recent technological inventions, including the printing press, telephone, and the Internet, have lowered barriers to communication and ushered in the knowledge economy.
While technology contributes to economic development and improves human prosperity, it can also have negative impacts such as pollution and resource depletion, and can cause social harms like technological unemployment resulting from automation.
As a result, philosophical and political debates about the role and use of technology, the ethics of technology, and ways to mitigate its downsides are ongoing.
Technology is a term dating back to the early 17th century that meant 'systematic treatment' (from Greek Τεχνολογία, from the Greek: τέχνη, romanized: tékhnē, lit.
It is predated in use by the Ancient Greek word τέχνη (tékhnē), used to mean 'knowledge of how to make things', which encompassed activities like architecture.
Starting in the 19th century, continental Europeans started using the terms Technik (German) or technique (French) to refer to a 'way of doing', which included all technical arts, such as dancing, navigation, or printing, whether or not they required tools or instruments.
At the time, Technologie (German and French) referred either to the academic discipline studying the "methods of arts and crafts", or to the political discipline "intended to legislate on the functions of the arts and crafts.
The term was previously uncommon in English and mostly referred to the academic discipline, as in the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
In the 20th century, as a result of scientific progress and the Second Industrial Revolution, technology stopped being considered a distinct academic discipline and took on the meaning: the systemic use of knowledge to practical ends.
Tools were initially developed by hominids through observation and trial and error.
Around 2 Mya (million years ago), they learned to make the first stone tools by hammering flakes off a pebble, forming a sharp hand axe.
This practice was refined 75 kya (thousand years ago) into pressure flaking, enabling much finer work.
The discovery of fire was described by Charles Darwin as "possibly the greatest ever made by man".
Archaeological, dietary, and social evidence point to "continuous [human] fire-use" at least 1.
Fire, fueled with wood and charcoal, allowed early humans to cook their food to increase its digestibility, improving its nutrient value and broadening the number of foods that could be eaten.
The cooking hypothesis proposes that the ability to cook promoted an increase in hominid brain size, though some researchers find the evidence inconclusive.
Archaeological evidence of hearths was dated to 790 kya; researchers believe this is likely to have intensified human socialization and may have contributed to the emergence of language.
Other technological advances made during the Paleolithic era include clothing and shelter.
No consensus exists on the approximate time of adoption of either technology, but archaeologists have found archaeological evidence of clothing 90-120 kya and shelter 450 kya.
As the Paleolithic era progressed, dwellings became more sophisticated and more elaborate; as early as 380 kya, humans were constructing temporary wood huts.
Clothing, adapted from the fur and hides of hunted animals, helped humanity expand into colder regions; humans began to migrate out of Africa around 200 kya, initially moving to Eurasia.
The Neolithic Revolution (or First Agricultural Revolution) brought about an acceleration of technological innovation, and a consequent increase in social complexity.
The invention of the polished stone axe was a major advance that allowed large-scale forest clearance and farming.
This use of polished stone axes increased greatly in the Neolithic but was originally used in the preceding Mesolithic in some areas such as Ireland.
Agriculture fed larger populations, and the transition to sedentism allowed for the simultaneous raising of more children, as infants no longer needed to be carried around by nomads.
Additionally, children could contribute labor to the raising of crops more readily than they could participate in hunter-gatherer activities.
With this increase in population and availability of labor came an increase in labor specialization.
What triggered the progression from early Neolithic villages to the first cities, such as Uruk, and the first civilizations, such as Sumer, is not specifically known; however, the emergence of increasingly hierarchical social structures and specialized labor, of trade and war among adjacent cultures, and the need for collective action to overcome environmental challenges such as irrigation, are all thought to have played a role.
The invention of writing led to the spread of cultural knowledge and became the basis for history, libraries, schools, and scientific research.
Continuing improvements led to the furnace and bellows and provided, for the first time, the ability to smelt and forge gold, copper, silver, and lead – native metals found in relatively pure form in nature.
The advantages of copper tools over stone, bone and wooden tools were quickly apparent to early humans, and native copper was probably used from near the beginning of Neolithic times (about 10 kya).
Native copper does not naturally occur in large amounts, but copper ores are quite common and some of them produce metal easily when burned in wood or charcoal fires.
Eventually, the working of metals led to the discovery of alloys such as bronze and brass (about 4,000 BCE).
The first use of iron alloys such as steel dates to around 1,800 BCE.
After harnessing fire, humans discovered other forms of energy.
The earliest known use of wind power is the sailing ship; the earliest record of a ship under sail is that of a Nile boat dating to around 7,000 BCE.
From prehistoric times, Egyptians likely used the power of the annual flooding of the Nile to irrigate their lands, gradually learning to regulate much of it through purposely built irrigation channels and "catch" basins.
The ancient Sumerians in Mesopotamia used a complex system of canals and levees to divert water from the Tigris and Euphrates rivers for irrigation.
Archaeologists estimate that the wheel was invented independently and concurrently in Mesopotamia (in present-day Iraq), the Northern Caucasus (Maykop culture), and Central Europe.
Time estimates range from 5,500 to 3,000 BCE with most experts putting it closer to 4,000 BCE.
The oldest artifacts with drawings depicting wheeled carts date from about 3,500 BCE.
More recently, the oldest-known wooden wheel in the world as of 2024 was found in the Ljubljana Marsh of Slovenia; Austrian experts have established that the wheel is between 5,100 and 5,350 years old.
The invention of the wheel revolutionized trade and war.
It did not take long to discover that wheeled wagons could be used to carry heavy loads.
The ancient Sumerians used a potter's wheel and may have invented it.
A stone pottery wheel found in the city-state of Ur dates to around 3,429 BCE, and even older fragments of wheel-thrown pottery have been found in the same area.
Fast (rotary) potters' wheels enabled early mass production of pottery, but it was the use of the wheel as a transformer of energy (through water wheels, windmills, and even treadmills) that revolutionized the application of nonhuman power sources.
The first two-wheeled carts were derived from travois and were first used in Mesopotamia and Iran in around 3,000 BCE.
The oldest known constructed roadways are the stone-paved streets of the city-state of Ur, dating to c.
The first long-distance road, which came into use around 3,500 BCE, spanned 2,400 km from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean Sea, but was not paved and was only partially maintained.
In around 2,000 BCE, the Minoans on the Greek island of Crete built a 50 km road leading from the palace of Gortyn on the south side of the island, through the mountains, to the palace of Knossos on the north side of the island.
Unlike the earlier road, the Minoan road was completely paved.
Ancient Minoan private homes had running water.
A bathtub virtually identical to modern ones was unearthed at the Palace of Knossos.
Several Minoan private homes also had toilets, which could be flushed by pouring water down the drain.
The ancient Romans had many public flush toilets, which emptied into an extensive sewage system.
The primary sewer in Rome was the Cloaca Maxima; construction began on it in the sixth century BCE and it is still in use today.
The ancient Romans also had a complex system of aqueducts, which were used to transport water across long distances.
The first Roman aqueduct was built in 312 BCE.
The eleventh and final ancient Roman aqueduct was built in 226 CE.
Put together, the Roman aqueducts extended over 450 km, but less than 70 km of this was above ground and supported by arches.
Innovations continued through the Middle Ages with the introduction of silk production (in Asia and later Europe), the horse collar, and horseshoes.
Simple machines (such as the lever, the screw, and the pulley) were combined into more complicated tools, such as the wheelbarrow, windmills, and clocks.
A system of universities developed and spread scientific ideas and practices, including Oxford and Cambridge.
The Renaissance era produced many innovations, including the introduction of the movable type printing press to Europe, which facilitated the communication of knowledge.
Technology became increasingly influenced by science, beginning a cycle of mutual advancement.
Starting in the United Kingdom in the 18th century, the discovery of steam power set off the Industrial Revolution, which saw wide-ranging technological discoveries, particularly in the areas of agriculture, manufacturing, mining, metallurgy, and transport, and the widespread application of the factory system.
This was followed a century later by the Second Industrial Revolution which led to rapid scientific discovery, standardization, and mass production.
New technologies were developed, including sewage systems, electricity, light bulbs, electric motors, railroads, automobiles, and airplanes.
These technological advances led to significant developments in medicine, chemistry, physics, and engineering.
They were accompanied by consequential social change, with the introduction of skyscrapers accompanied by rapid urbanization.
Communication improved with the invention of the telegraph, the telephone, the radio, and television.
The 20th century brought a host of innovations.
In physics, the discovery of nuclear fission in the Atomic Age led to both nuclear weapons and nuclear power.
Analog computers were invented and asserted dominance in processing complex data.
While the invention of vacuum tubes allowed for digital computing with computers like the ENIAC, their sheer size precluded widespread use until innovations in quantum physics allowed for the invention of the transistor in 1947, which significantly compacted computers and led the digital transition.
Information technology, particularly optical fiber and optical amplifiers, allowed for simple and fast long-distance communication, which ushered in the Information Age and the birth of the Internet.
The Space Age began with the launch of Sputnik 1 in 1957, and later the launch of crewed missions to the moon in the 1960s.
Organized efforts to search for extraterrestrial intelligence have used radio telescopes to detect signs of technology use, or technosignatures, given off by alien civilizations.
In medicine, new technologies were developed for diagnosis (CT, PET, and MRI scanning), treatment (like the dialysis machine, defibrillator, pacemaker, and a wide array of new pharmaceutical drugs), and research (like interferon cloning and DNA microarrays).
Complex manufacturing and construction techniques and organizations are needed to make and maintain more modern technologies, and entire industries have arisen to develop succeeding generations of increasingly more complex tools.
Modern technology increasingly relies on training and education – their designers, builders, maintainers, and users often require sophisticated general and specific training.
Moreover, these technologies have become so complex that entire fields have developed to support them, including engineering, medicine, and computer science; and other fields have become more complex, such as construction, transportation, and architecture.
Technological change is the largest cause of long-term economic growth.
Throughout human history, energy production was the main constraint on economic development, and new technologies allowed humans to significantly increase the amount of available energy.
First came fire, which made edible a wider variety of foods, and made it less physically demanding to digest them.
Fire also enabled smelting, and the use of tin, copper, and iron tools, used for hunting or tradesmanship.
Then came the agricultural revolution: humans no longer needed to hunt or gather to survive, and began to settle in towns and cities, forming more complex societies, with militaries and more organized forms of religion.
Technologies have contributed to human welfare through increased prosperity, improved comfort and quality of life, and medical progress, but they can also disrupt existing social hierarchies, cause pollution, and harm individuals or groups.
Recent years have brought about a rise in social media's cultural prominence, with potential repercussions on democracy, and economic and social life.
Early on, the internet was seen as a "liberation technology" that would democratize knowledge, improve access to education, and promote democracy.
Modern research has turned to investigate the internet's downsides, including disinformation, polarization, hate speech, and propaganda.
Since the 1970s, technology's impact on the environment has been criticized, leading to a surge in investment in solar, wind, and other forms of clean energy.
Since the invention of the wheel, technologies have helped increase humans' economic output.
Past automation has both substituted and complemented labor; machines replaced humans at some lower-paying jobs (for example in agriculture), but this was compensated by the creation of new, higher-paying jobs.
Studies have found that computers did not create significant net technological unemployment.
Due to artificial intelligence being far more capable than computers, and still being in its infancy, it is not known whether it will follow the same trend; the question has been debated at length among economists and policymakers.
A 2017 survey found no clear consensus among economists on whether AI would increase long-term unemployment.
According to the World Economic Forum's "The Future of Jobs Report 2020", AI is predicted to replace 85 million jobs worldwide, and create 97 million new jobs by 2025.
From 1990 to 2007, a study in the U.
Concerns about technology replacing human labor however are long-lasting.
As US president Lyndon Johnson said in 1964, "Technology is creating both new opportunities and new obligations for us, opportunity for greater productivity and progress; obligation to be sure that no workingman, no family must pay an unjust price for progress.
With the growing reliance of technology, there have been security and privacy concerns along with it.
Billions of people use different online payment methods, such as WeChat Pay, PayPal, Alipay, and much more to help transfer money.
Although security measures are placed, some criminals are able to bypass them.
In March 2022, North Korea used Blender.
Because of this, the U.
Treasury Department sanctioned Blender.
The privacy of cryptocurrency has been debated.
Although many customers like the privacy of cryptocurrency, many also argue that it needs more transparency and stability.
Technology can have both positive and negative effects on the environment.
Environmental technology, describes an array of technologies which seek to reverse, mitigate or halt environmental damage to the environment.
This can include measures to halt pollution through environmental regulations, capture and storage of pollution, or using pollutant byproducts in other industries.
Other examples of environmental technology include deforestation and the reversing of deforestation.
Emerging technologies in the fields of climate engineering may be able to halt or reverse global warming and its environmental impacts, although this remains highly controversial.
As technology has advanced, so too has the negative environmental impact, with increased release of greenhouse gases, including methane, nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide, into the atmosphere, causing the greenhouse effect.
This continues to gradually heat the earth, causing global warming and climate change.
Measures of technological innovation correlates with a rise in greenhouse gas emissions.
Pollution, the presence of contaminants in an environment that causes adverse effects, could have been present as early as the Inca Empire.
They used a lead sulfide flux in the smelting of ores, along with the use of a wind-drafted clay kiln, which released lead into the atmosphere and the sediment of rivers.
Philosophy of technology is a branch of philosophy that studies the "practice of designing and creating artifacts", and the "nature of the things so created.
The humanities philosophy of technology is concerned with the "meaning of technology for, and its impact on, society and culture".
Initially, technology was seen as an extension of the human organism that replicated or amplified bodily and mental faculties.
Marx framed it as a tool used by capitalists to oppress the proletariat, but believed that technology would be a fundamentally liberating force once it was "freed from societal deformations".
Second-wave philosophers like Ortega later shifted their focus from economics and politics to "daily life and living in a techno-material culture", arguing that technology could oppress "even the members of the bourgeoisie who were its ostensible masters and possessors.
Early scholarship on technology was split between two arguments: technological determinism, and social construction.
Technological determinism is the idea that technologies cause unavoidable social changes.
It usually encompasses a related argument, technological autonomy, which asserts that technological progress follows a natural progression and cannot be prevented.
Social constructivists argue that technologies follow no natural progression, and are shaped by cultural values, laws, politics, and economic incentives.
Modern scholarship has shifted towards an analysis of sociotechnical systems, "assemblages of things, people, practices, and meanings", looking at the value judgments that shape technology.
Cultural critic Neil Postman distinguished tool-using societies from technological societies and from what he called "technopolies", societies that are dominated by an ideology of technological and scientific progress to the detriment of other cultural practices, values, and world views.
Herbert Marcuse and John Zerzan suggest that technological society will inevitably deprive us of our freedom and psychological health.
The ethics of technology is an interdisciplinary subfield of ethics that analyzes technology's ethical implications and explores ways to mitigate potential negative impacts of new technologies.
There is a broad range of ethical issues revolving around technology, from specific areas of focus affecting professionals working with technology to broader social, ethical, and legal issues concerning the role of technology in society and everyday life.
Prominent debates have surrounded genetically modified organisms, the use of military robots, algorithmic bias, and the issue of aligning AI behavior with human values.
Technology ethics encompasses several key fields: Bioethics looks at ethical issues surrounding biotechnologies and modern medicine, including cloning, human genetic engineering, and stem cell research.
Computer ethics focuses on issues related to computing.
Cyberethics explores internet-related issues like intellectual property rights, privacy, and censorship.
Nanoethics examines issues surrounding the alteration of matter at the atomic and molecular level in various disciplines including computer science, engineering, and biology.
And engineering ethics deals with the professional standards of engineers, including software engineers and their moral responsibilities to the public.
A wide branch of technology ethics is concerned with the ethics of artificial intelligence: it includes robot ethics, which deals with ethical issues involved in the design, construction, use, and treatment of robots, as well as machine ethics, which is concerned with ensuring the ethical behavior of artificially intelligent agents.
Within the field of AI ethics, significant yet-unsolved research problems include AI alignment (ensuring that AI behaviors are aligned with their creators' intended goals and interests) and the reduction of algorithmic bias.
Some researchers have warned against the hypothetical risk of an AI takeover, and have advocated for the use of AI capability control in addition to AI alignment methods.
Other fields of ethics have had to contend with technology-related issues, including military ethics, media ethics, and educational ethics.
Futures studies is the study of social and technological progress.
It aims to explore the range of plausible futures and incorporate human values in the development of new technologies.
More generally, futures researchers are interested in improving "the freedom and welfare of humankind".
It relies on a thorough quantitative and qualitative analysis of past and present technological trends, and attempts to rigorously extrapolate them into the future.
Science fiction is often used as a source of ideas.
Futures research methodologies include survey research, modeling, statistical analysis, and computer simulations.
Existential risk researchers analyze risks that could lead to human extinction or civilizational collapse, and look for ways to build resilience against them.
Relevant research centers include the Cambridge Center for the Study of Existential Risk, and the Stanford Existential Risk Initiative.
Future technologies may contribute to the risks of artificial general intelligence, biological warfare, nuclear warfare, nanotechnology, anthropogenic climate change, global warming, or stable global totalitarianism, though technologies may also help us mitigate asteroid impacts and gamma-ray bursts.
In 2019 philosopher Nick Bostrom introduced the notion of a vulnerable world, "one in which there is some level of technological development at which civilization almost certainly gets devastated by default", citing the risks of a pandemic caused by bioterrorists, or an arms race triggered by the development of novel armaments and the loss of mutual assured destruction.
He invites policymakers to question the assumptions that technological progress is always beneficial, that scientific openness is always preferable, or that they can afford to wait until a dangerous technology has been invented before they prepare mitigations.
Emerging technologies are novel technologies whose development or practical applications are still largely unrealized.
They include nanotechnology, biotechnology, robotics, 3D printing, and blockchains.
In 2005, futurist Ray Kurzweil claimed the next technological revolution would rest upon advances in genetics, nanotechnology, and robotics, with robotics being the most impactful of the three technologies.
Genetic engineering will allow far greater control over human biological nature through a process called directed evolution.
Some thinkers believe that this may shatter our sense of self, and have urged for renewed public debate exploring the issue more thoroughly; others fear that directed evolution could lead to eugenics or extreme social inequality.
Nanotechnology will grant us the ability to manipulate matter "at the molecular and atomic scale", which could allow us to reshape ourselves and our environment in fundamental ways.
Nanobots could be used within the human body to destroy cancer cells or form new body parts, blurring the line between biology and technology.
Autonomous robots have undergone rapid progress, and are expected to replace humans at many dangerous tasks, including search and rescue, bomb disposal, firefighting, and war.
Estimates on the advent of artificial general intelligence vary, but half of machine learning experts surveyed in 2018 believe that AI will "accomplish every task better and more cheaply" than humans by 2063, and automate all human jobs by 2140.
This expected technological unemployment has led to calls for increased emphasis on computer science education and debates about universal basic income.
Political science experts predict that this could lead to a rise in extremism, while others see it as an opportunity to usher in a post-scarcity economy.
Some segments of the 1960s hippie counterculture grew to dislike urban living and developed a preference for locally autonomous, sustainable, and decentralized technology, termed appropriate technology.
This later influenced hacker culture and technopaganism.
Technological utopianism refers to the belief that technological development is a moral good, which can and should bring about a utopia, that is, a society in which laws, governments, and social conditions serve the needs of all its citizens.
Examples of techno-utopian goals include post-scarcity economics, life extension, mind uploading, cryonics, and the creation of artificial superintelligence.
Major techno-utopian movements include transhumanism and singularitarianism.
The transhumanism movement is founded upon the "continued evolution of human life beyond its current human form" through science and technology, informed by "life-promoting principles and values.
Singularitarians believe that machine superintelligence will "accelerate technological progress" by orders of magnitude and "create even more intelligent entities ever faster", which may lead to a pace of societal and technological change that is "incomprehensible" to us.
This event horizon is known as the technological singularity.
Major figures of techno-utopianism include Ray Kurzweil and Nick Bostrom.
Techno-utopianism has attracted both praise and criticism from progressive, religious, and conservative thinkers.
Technology's central role in our lives has drawn concerns and backlash.
The backlash against technology is not a uniform movement and encompasses many heterogeneous ideologies.
The earliest known revolt against technology was Luddism, a pushback against early automation in textile production.
Automation had resulted in a need for fewer workers, a process known as technological unemployment.
Between the 1970s and 1990s, American terrorist Ted Kaczynski carried out a series of bombings across America and published the Unabomber Manifesto denouncing technology's negative impacts on nature and human freedom.
The essay resonated with a large part of the American public.
It was partly inspired by Jacques Ellul's The Technological Society.
Some subcultures, like the off-the-grid movement, advocate a withdrawal from technology and a return to nature.
The ecovillage movement seeks to reestablish harmony between technology and nature.
Engineering is the process by which technology is developed.
It often requires problem-solving under strict constraints.
Technological development is "action-oriented", while scientific knowledge is fundamentally explanatory.
Polish philosopher Henryk Skolimowski framed it like so: "science concerns itself with what is, technology with what is to be.
The direction of causality between scientific discovery and technological innovation has been debated by scientists, philosophers and policymakers.
Because innovation is often undertaken at the edge of scientific knowledge, most technologies are not derived from scientific knowledge, but instead from engineering, tinkering and chance.
For example, in the 1940s and 1950s, when knowledge of turbulent combustion or fluid dynamics was still crude, jet engines were invented through "running the device to destruction, analyzing what broke [.
Scientific explanations often follow technological developments rather than preceding them.
Many discoveries also arose from pure chance, like the discovery of penicillin as a result of accidental lab contamination.
Since the 1960s, the assumption that government funding of basic research would lead to the discovery of marketable technologies has lost credibility.
Probabilist Nassim Taleb argues that national research programs that implement the notions of serendipity and convexity through frequent trial and error are more likely to lead to useful innovations than research that aims to reach specific outcomes.
Despite this, modern technology is increasingly reliant on deep, domain-specific scientific knowledge.
In 1975, there was an average of one citation of scientific literature in every three patents granted in the U.
The average was skewed upwards by patents related to the pharmaceutical industry, chemistry, and electronics.
A 2021 analysis shows that patents that are based on scientific discoveries are on average 26% more valuable than equivalent non-science-based patents.
The use of basic technology is also a feature of non-human animal species.
Tool use was once considered a defining characteristic of the genus Homo.
This view was supplanted after discovering evidence of tool use among chimpanzees and other primates, dolphins, and crows.
For example, researchers have observed wild chimpanzees using basic foraging tools, pestles, levers, using leaves as sponges, and tree bark or vines as probes to fish termites.
West African chimpanzees use stone hammers and anvils for cracking nuts, as do capuchin monkeys of Boa Vista, Brazil.
Tool use is not the only form of animal technology use; for example, beaver dams, built with wooden sticks or large stones, are a technology with "dramatic" impacts on river habitats and ecosystems.
Gribbin, John, "Alone in the Milky Way: Why we are probably the only intelligent life in the galaxy", Scientific American, vol.
Almost certainly yes, given the speed with which it appeared on Earth.
Is another technological civilization likely to exist today?
Almost certainly no, given the chain of circumstances that led to our existence.
These considerations suggest that we are unique not just on our planet but in the whole Milky Way.
And if our planet is so special, it becomes all the more important to preserve this unique world for ourselves, our descendants and the many creatures that call Earth home.
Agriculture is the practice of cultivating the soil, planting, raising, and harvesting both food and non-food crops, as well as livestock production.
Broader definitions also include forestry and aquaculture.
Agriculture was a key factor in the rise of sedentary human civilization, whereby farming of domesticated plants and animals created food surpluses that enabled people to live in the cities.
While humans started gathering grains at least 105,000 years ago, nascent farmers only began planting them around 11,500 years ago.
Sheep, goats, pigs, and cattle were domesticated around 10,000 years ago.
Plants were independently cultivated in at least 11 regions of the world.
In the 20th century, industrial agriculture based on large-scale monocultures came to dominate agricultural output.
As of 2021, small farms, of which the vast majority are one hectare (about 2.
Moreover, five of every six farms in the world consist of fewer than 2 hectares (4.
In terms of total land use, large farms are dominant.
While only 1% of all farms globally are greater than 50 hectares (120 acres), they encompass more than 70% of the world's farmland.
Further, nearly 40% of all global agricultural land is found on farms larger than 1,000 hectares (2,500 acres).
Farms and farming greatly influence rural economics and greatly shape rural society, affecting both the direct agricultural workforce and broader businesses that support the farms and farming populations.
The major agricultural products can be broadly grouped into foods, fibers, fuels, and raw materials (such as rubber and timber).
Food classes include cereals (grains), vegetables, fruits, cooking oils, meat, milk, eggs, and fungi.
Global agricultural production amounts to approximately 11 billion tonnes of food, 32 million tonnes of natural fibers and 4 billion m3 of wood.
However, around 14% of the world's food is lost from production before reaching the retail level.
Modern agronomy, plant breeding, agrochemicals such as pesticides and fertilizers, and technological developments have sharply increased crop yields, but also contributed to ecological and environmental damage.
Selective breeding and modern practices in animal husbandry have similarly increased the output of meat, but have raised concerns about animal welfare and environmental damage.
Environmental issues include contributions to climate change, depletion of aquifers, deforestation, antibiotic resistance, and other agricultural pollution.
Agriculture is both a cause of and sensitive to environmental degradation, such as biodiversity loss, desertification, soil degradation, and climate change, all of which can cause decreases in crop yield.
Genetically modified organisms are widely used, although some countries ban them.
The word agriculture is a late Middle English adaptation of Latin agricultūra, from ager 'field' and cultūra 'cultivation' or 'growing'.
Agriculture is defined with varying scopes, in its broadest sense using natural resources to "produce commodities which maintain life, including food, fiber, forest products, horticultural crops, and their related services".
Thus defined, it includes arable farming, horticulture, animal husbandry and forestry, but horticulture and forestry are in practice often excluded.
It may also be broadly decomposed into plant agriculture, which concerns the cultivation of useful plants, and animal agriculture, the production of agricultural animals.
While agriculture usually refers to human activities, other species have been cultivating crops for up to 60 million years, such as some ant (see agriculture in ants), termite and beetle.
The development of agriculture enabled the human population to grow many times larger than could be sustained by hunting and gathering.
Agriculture began independently in different parts of the globe, and included a diverse range of taxa, in at least 11 separate centers of origin.
Wild grains were collected and eaten from at least 105,000 years ago.
In the Paleolithic Levant, 23,000 years ago, cereals cultivation of emmer, barley, and oats has been observed near the sea of Galilee.
Rice was domesticated in China between 11,500 and 6200 BC with the earliest known cultivation from 5700 BC, followed by mung, soy and azuki beans.
Sheep were domesticated in Mesopotamia between 13,000 and 11,000 years ago.
Cattle were domesticated from the wild aurochs in the areas of modern Turkey and Pakistan some 10,500 years ago.
Pig production emerged in Eurasia, including Europe, East Asia and Southwest Asia, where wild boar were first domesticated about 10,500 years ago.
In the Andes of South America, the potato was domesticated between 10,000 and 7,000 years ago, along with beans, coca, llamas, alpacas, and guinea pigs.
Sugarcane and some root vegetables were domesticated in New Guinea around 9,000 years ago.
Sorghum was domesticated in the Sahel region of Africa by 7,000 years ago.
Cotton was domesticated in Peru by 5,600 years ago, and was independently domesticated in Eurasia.
In Mesoamerica, wild teosinte was bred into maize (corn) from 10,000 to 6,000 years ago.
The horse was domesticated in the Eurasian Steppes around 3500 BC.
Scholars have offered multiple hypotheses to explain the historical origins of agriculture.
Studies of the transition from hunter-gatherer to agricultural societies indicate an initial period of intensification and increasing sedentism; examples are the Natufian culture in the Levant, and the Early Chinese Neolithic in China.
Then, wild stands that had previously been harvested started to be planted, and gradually came to be domesticated.
In Eurasia, the Sumerians started to live in villages from about 8000 BC, relying on the Tigris and Euphrates rivers and a canal system for irrigation.
Ploughs appear in pictographs around 3000 BC; seed-ploughs around 2300 BC.
Farmers grew wheat, barley, vegetables such as lentils and onions, and fruits including dates, grapes, and figs.
Ancient Egyptian agriculture relied on the Nile River and its seasonal flooding.
Farming started in the predynastic period at the end of the Paleolithic, after 10,000 BC.
Staple food crops were grains such as wheat and barley, alongside industrial crops such as flax and papyrus.
In India, wheat, barley and jujube were domesticated by 9000 BC, soon followed by sheep and goats.
Cattle, sheep and goats were domesticated in Mehrgarh culture by 8000–6000 BC.
Cotton was cultivated by the 5th–4th millennium BC.
Archeological evidence indicates an animal-drawn plough from 2500 BC in the Indus Valley civilization.
In China, from the 5th century BC, there was a nationwide granary system and widespread silk farming.
Water-powered grain mills were in use by the 1st century BC, followed by irrigation.
By the late 2nd century, heavy ploughs had been developed with iron ploughshares and mouldboards.
These spread westwards across Eurasia.
Asian rice was domesticated 8,200–13,500 years ago – depending on the molecular clock estimate that is used– on the Pearl River in southern China with a single genetic origin from the wild rice Oryza rufipogon.
In Greece and Rome, the major cereals were wheat, emmer, and barley, alongside vegetables including peas, beans, and olives.
Sheep and goats were kept mainly for dairy products.
In the Americas, crops domesticated in Mesoamerica (apart from teosinte) include squash, beans, and cacao.
Cocoa was domesticated by the Mayo Chinchipe of the upper Amazon around 3000 BC.
The turkey was probably domesticated in Mexico or the American Southwest.
The Aztecs developed irrigation systems, formed terraced hillsides, fertilized their soil, and developed chinampas or artificial islands.
The Mayas used extensive canal and raised field systems to farm swampland from 400 BC.
In South America agriculture may have begun about 9000 BC with the domestication of squash (Cucurbita) and other plants.
Coca was domesticated in the Andes, as were the peanut, tomato, tobacco, and pineapple.
Cotton was domesticated in Peru by 3600 BC.
Animals including llamas, alpacas, and guinea pigs were domesticated there.
In North America, the indigenous people of the East domesticated crops such as sunflower, tobacco, squash and Chenopodium.
Wild foods including wild rice and maple sugar were harvested.
The domesticated strawberry is a hybrid of a Chilean and a North American species, developed by breeding in Europe and North America.
The indigenous people of the Southwest and the Pacific Northwest practiced forest gardening and fire-stick farming.
The natives controlled fire on a regional scale to create a low-intensity fire ecology that sustained a low-density agriculture in loose rotation; a sort of "wild" permaculture.
A system of companion planting called the Three Sisters was developed in North America.
The three crops were winter squash, maize, and climbing beans.
Indigenous Australians, long supposed to have been nomadic hunter-gatherers, practiced systematic burning, possibly to enhance natural productivity in fire-stick farming.
Scholars have pointed out that hunter-gatherers need a productive environment to support gathering without cultivation.
Because the forests of New Guinea have few food plants, early humans may have used "selective burning" to increase the productivity of the wild karuka fruit trees to support the hunter-gatherer way of life.
The Gunditjmara and other groups developed eel farming and fish trapping systems from some 5,000 years ago.
There is evidence of 'intensification' across the whole continent over that period.
In two regions of Australia, the central west coast and eastern central, early farmers cultivated yams, native millet, and bush onions, possibly in permanent settlements.
In the Middle Ages, compared to the Roman period, agriculture in Western Europe became more focused on self-sufficiency.
The agricultural population under feudalism was typically organized into manors consisting of several hundred or more acres of land presided over by a lord of the manor with a Roman Catholic church and priest.
Thanks to the exchange with the Al-Andalus where the Arab Agricultural Revolution was underway, European agriculture transformed, with improved techniques and the diffusion of crop plants, including the introduction of sugar, rice, cotton and fruit trees (such as the orange).
After 1492, the Columbian exchange brought New World crops such as maize, potatoes, tomatoes, sweet potatoes, and manioc to Europe, and Old World crops such as wheat, barley, rice, and turnips, and livestock (including horses, cattle, sheep and goats) to the Americas.
Irrigation, crop rotation, and fertilizers advanced from the 17th century with the British Agricultural Revolution, allowing global population to rise significantly.
Since 1900, agriculture in developed nations, and to a lesser extent in the developing world, has seen large rises in productivity as mechanization replaces human labor, and assisted by synthetic fertilizers, pesticides, and selective breeding.
The Haber-Bosch method allowed the synthesis of ammonium nitrate fertilizer on an industrial scale, greatly increasing crop yields and sustaining a further increase in global population.
Pastoralism involves managing domesticated animals.
In nomadic pastoralism, herds of livestock are moved from place to place in search of pasture, fodder, and water.
This type of farming is practiced in arid and semi-arid regions of Sahara, Central Asia and some parts of India.
In shifting cultivation, a small area of forest is cleared by cutting and burning the trees.
The cleared land is used for growing crops for a few years until the soil becomes too infertile, and the area is abandoned.
Another patch of land is selected and the process is repeated.
This type of farming is practiced mainly in areas with abundant rainfall where the forest regenerates quickly.
This practice is used in Northeast India, Southeast Asia, and the Amazon Basin.
Subsistence farming is practiced to satisfy family or local needs alone, with little left over for transport elsewhere.
It is intensively practiced in Monsoon Asia and South-East Asia.
Intensive farming is cultivation to maximize productivity, with a low fallow ratio and a high use of inputs (water, fertilizer, pesticide and automation).
It is practiced mainly in developed countries.
From the twentieth century onwards, intensive agriculture increased crop productivity.
It substituted synthetic fertilizers and pesticides for labor, but caused increased water pollution, and often involved farm subsidies.
Soil degradation and diseases such as stem rust are major concerns globally; approximately 40% of the world's agricultural land is seriously degraded.
Modern agriculture has raised or encountered ecological, political, and economic issues including water pollution, biofuels, genetically modified organisms, tariffs and farm subsidies, leading to alternative approaches such as the organic movement.
Unsustainable farming practices in North America led to the Dust Bowl of the 1930s.
In recent years there has been a backlash against the environmental effects of conventional agriculture, resulting in the organic, regenerative, and sustainable agriculture movements.
One of the major forces behind this movement has been the European Union, which first certified organic food in 1991 and began reform of its Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) in 2005 to phase out commodity-linked farm subsidies, also known as decoupling.
The growth of organic farming has renewed research in alternative technologies such as integrated pest management, selective breeding, and controlled-environment agriculture.
There are concerns about the lower yield associated with organic farming and its impact on global food security.
Recent mainstream technological developments include genetically modified food.
During the 60-year period between 1964 and 2023, most of the increase in agricultural production was achieved through intensification, while the expansion of agricultural land was limited to just 8%.
In the twenty-first century, between 2001 and 2023, global agricultural area decreased by 78 million hectares (Mha) (−2%), with cropland area increasing by 78 Mha and permanent meadows and pastures decreasing by 151 Mha.
These changes exhibit significant regional variations.
Sub-Saharan Africa witnessed cropland expansion of 69 Mha accompanied by 72 Mha of forest loss, while Latin America saw 25 Mha of cropland growth alongside 85 Mha of net forest area loss.
Agricultural expansion remains the primary driver of global deforestation, accounting for nearly 90% of forest loss.
In this century, another important aspect to consider is that approximately 3.
By 2015, the agricultural output of China was the largest in the world, followed by the European Union, India and the United States.
Economists measure the total factor productivity of agriculture, according to which agriculture in the United States is roughly 1.
Agriculture employed 873 million people in 2021, or 27% of the global workforce, 916 million in 2023, compared with 1 027 million (or 40%) in 2000.
The share of agriculture in global GDP was stable at around 4% since 2000–2023.
Despite increases in agricultural production and productivity, between 702 and 828 million people were affected by hunger in 2021.
Food insecurity and malnutrition can be the result of conflict, climate extremes and variability and economic swings.
It can also be caused by a country's structural characteristics such as income status and natural resource endowments as well as its political economy.
Pesticide use in agriculture went up 62% between 2000 and 2021, with the Americas accounting for half the use in 2021.
The International Fund for Agricultural Development posits that an increase in smallholder agriculture may be part of the solution to concerns about food prices and overall food security, given the favorable experience of Vietnam.
Disasters have inflicted an estimated USD 3.
Agriculture provides about one-quarter of all global employment, more than half in sub-Saharan Africa and almost 60 percent in low-income countries.
As countries develop, other jobs have historically pulled workers away from agriculture, and labor-saving innovations increase agricultural productivity by reducing labor requirements per unit of output.
Over time, a combination of labor supply and labor demand trends have driven down the share of population employed in agriculture.
During the 16th century in Europe, between 55 and 75% of the population was engaged in agriculture; by the 19th century, this had dropped to between 35 and 65%.
In the same countries today, the figure is less than 10%.
At the start of the 21st century, some one billion people, or over 1/3 of the available work force, were employed in agriculture.
This constitutes approximately 70% of the global employment of children, and in many countries constitutes the largest percentage of women of any industry.
The service sector overtook the agricultural sector as the largest global employer in 2007.
In many developed countries, immigrants help fill labor shortages in high-value agriculture activities that are difficult to mechanize.
Foreign farm workers from mostly Eastern Europe, North Africa and South Asia constituted around one-third of the salaried agricultural workforce in Spain, Italy, Greece and Portugal in 2013.
In the United States of America, more than half of all hired farmworkers (roughly 450,000 workers) were immigrants in 2019, although the number of new immigrants arriving in the country to work in agriculture has fallen by 75 percent in recent years and rising wages indicate this has led to a major labor shortage on US farms.
Around the world, women make up a large share of the population employed in agriculture.
This share is growing in all developing regions except East and Southeast Asia where women already make up about 50 percent of the agricultural workforce.
Women make up 47 percent of the agricultural workforce in sub-Saharan Africa, a rate that has not changed significantly in the past few decades.
However, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) posits that the roles and responsibilities of women in agriculture may be changing – for example, from subsistence farming to wage employment, and from contributing household members to primary producers in the context of male-out-migration.
In general, women account for a greater share of agricultural employment at lower levels of economic development, as inadequate education, limited access to basic infrastructure and markets, high unpaid work burden and poor rural employment opportunities outside agriculture severely limit women's opportunities for off-farm work.
Women who work in agricultural production tend to do so under highly unfavorable conditions.
They tend to be concentrated in the poorest countries, where alternative livelihoods are not available, and they maintain the intensity of their work in conditions of climate-induced weather shocks and in situations of conflict.
Women are less likely to participate as entrepreneurs and independent farmers and are engaged in the production of less lucrative crops.
The gender gap in land productivity between female- and male managed farms of the same size is 24 percent.
On average, women earn 18.
Progress has been slow in closing gaps in women's access to irrigation and in ownership of livestock, too.
Women in agriculture still have significantly less access than men to inputs, including improved seeds, fertilizers and mechanized equipment.
On a positive note, the gender gap in access to mobile internet in low- and middle-income countries fell from 25 percent to 16 percent between 2017 and 2021, and the gender gap in access to bank accounts narrowed from 9 to 6 percentage points.
Women are as likely as men to adopt new technologies when the necessary enabling factors are put in place and they have equal access to complementary resources.
Agriculture, specifically farming, remains a hazardous industry, and farmers worldwide remain at high risk of work-related injuries, lung disease, noise-induced hearing loss, skin diseases, as well as certain cancers related to chemical use and prolonged sun exposure.
On industrialized farms, injuries frequently involve the use of agricultural machinery, and a common cause of fatal agricultural injuries in developed countries is tractor rollovers.
Pesticides and other chemicals used in farming can be hazardous to worker health, and workers exposed to pesticides may experience illness or have children with birth defects.
As an industry in which families commonly share in work and live on the farm itself, entire families can be at risk for injuries, illness, and death.
Ages 0–6 may be an especially vulnerable population in agriculture; common causes of fatal injuries among young farm workers include drowning, machinery and motor accidents, including with all-terrain vehicles.
Occupational fatality data from the last decade indicate that, when looking at all industries, agriculture had the leading number of work-related deaths for youth.
Within this industry, youth between the ages of 10 and 15 suffered the most non-fatal work-related injuries.
While farming is hazardous, studies have looked at the fact that there are also many benefits to growing up and living on a farm.
The International Labor Organization considers agriculture "one of the most hazardous of all economic sectors".
It estimates that the annual work-related death toll among agricultural employees is at least 170,000, twice the average rate of other jobs.
In addition, incidences of death, injury and illness related to agricultural activities often go unreported.
The organization has developed the Safety and Health in Agriculture Convention, 2001, which covers the range of risks in the agriculture occupation, the prevention of these risks and the role that individuals and organizations engaged in agriculture should play.
In the United States, agriculture has been identified by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health as a priority industry sector in the National Occupational Research Agenda to identify and provide intervention strategies for occupational health and safety issues.
In the European Union, the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work has issued guidelines on implementing health and safety directives in agriculture, livestock farming, horticulture, and forestry.
The Agricultural Safety and Health Council of America (ASHCA) also holds a yearly summit to discuss safety.
Pressure on land, soil and water resources has seriously compromised the performance and future prospects of agriculture, resulting in further loss of productive land and reduced water availability for farming and other forms of agricultural production.
Agricultural expansion drives deforestation and is one of the primary causes of the degradation of carbon-rich ecosystems such as peatlands.
An estimated 64% of agricultural land is at risk of pesticide pollution, which damages biodiversity by destroying pollinators, harms soil microbiota and makes agrifood systems less resilient to pests, pathogens and climate change.
Accounting for 72% of global freshwater withdrawals, a figure predicted to rise further in the future, agriculture contributes to and is increasingly affected by water scarcity.
Overexploitation of groundwater and seawater intrusion in coastal aquifers is widespread, with major implications for food security.
Overall production varies by country as listed.
Cropping systems vary among farms depending on the available resources and constraints; geography and climate of the farm; government policy; economic, social and political pressures; and the philosophy and culture of the farmer.
Shifting cultivation (or slash and burn) is a system in which forests are burnt, releasing nutrients to support cultivation of annual and then perennial crops for a period of several years.
Then the plot is left fallow to regrow forest, and the farmer moves to a new plot, returning after many more years (10–20).
This fallow period is shortened if population density grows, requiring the input of nutrients (fertilizer or manure) and some manual pest control.
Annual cultivation is the next phase of intensity in which there is no fallow period.
This requires even greater nutrient and pest control inputs.
Further industrialization led to the use of monocultures, when one cultivar is planted on a large acreage.
Because of the low biodiversity, nutrient use is uniform and pests tend to build up, necessitating the greater use of pesticides and fertilizers.
Multiple cropping, in which several crops are grown sequentially in one year, and intercropping, when several crops are grown at the same time, are other kinds of annual cropping systems known as polycultures.
In subtropical and arid environments, the timing and extent of agriculture may be limited by rainfall, either not allowing multiple annual crops in a year, or requiring irrigation.
In all of these environments perennial crops are grown (coffee, chocolate) and systems are practiced such as agroforestry.
In temperate environments, where ecosystems were predominantly grassland or prairie, highly productive annual farming is the dominant agricultural system.
Important categories of food crops include cereals, legumes, forage, fruits and vegetables.
Natural fibers include cotton, wool, hemp, silk and flax.
Specific crops are cultivated in distinct growing regions throughout the world.
Production is listed in millions of metric tons, based on FAO estimates.
Animal husbandry is the breeding and raising of animals for meat, milk, eggs, or wool, and for work and transport.
Working animals, including horses, mules, oxen, water buffalo, camels, llamas, alpacas, donkeys, and dogs, have for centuries been used to help cultivate fields, harvest crops, wrangle other animals, and transport farm products to buyers.
Livestock production systems can be defined based on feed source, as grassland-based, mixed, and landless.
As of 2010, 30% of Earth's ice- and water-free area was used for producing livestock, with the sector employing approximately 1.
Between the 1960s and the 2000s, there was a significant increase in livestock production, both by numbers and by carcass weight, especially among beef, pigs and chickens, the latter of which had production increased by almost a factor of 10.
Non-meat animals, such as milk cows and egg-producing chickens, also showed significant production increases.
Global cattle, sheep and goat populations are expected to continue to increase sharply through 2050.
Aquaculture or fish farming, the production of fish for human consumption in confined operations, is one of the fastest growing sectors of food production, growing at an average of 9% a year between 1975 and 2007.
During the second half of the 20th century, producers using selective breeding focused on creating livestock breeds and crossbreeds that increased production, while mostly disregarding the need to preserve genetic diversity.
This trend has led to a significant decrease in genetic diversity and resources among livestock breeds, leading to a corresponding decrease in disease resistance and local adaptations previously found among traditional breeds.
Grassland based livestock production relies upon plant material such as shrubland, rangeland, and pastures for feeding ruminant animals.
Outside nutrient inputs may be used, however manure is returned directly to the grassland as a major nutrient source.
This system is particularly important in areas where crop production is not feasible because of climate or soil, representing 30–40 million pastoralists.
Mixed production systems use grassland, fodder crops and grain feed crops as feed for ruminant and monogastric (one stomach; mainly chickens and pigs) livestock.
Manure is typically recycled in mixed systems as a fertilizer for crops.
Landless systems rely upon feed from outside the farm, representing the de-linking of crop and livestock production found more prevalently in Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development member countries.
Synthetic fertilizers are more heavily relied upon for crop production and manure use becomes a challenge as well as a source for pollution.
Industrialized countries use these operations to produce much of the global supplies of poultry and pork.
Scientists estimate that 75% of the growth in livestock production between 2003 and 2030 will be in confined animal feeding operations, sometimes called factory farming.
Much of this growth is happening in developing countries in Asia, with much smaller amounts of growth in Africa.
Some of the practices used in commercial livestock production, including the usage of growth hormones, are controversial.
Tillage is the practice of breaking up the soil with tools such as the plow or harrow to prepare for planting, for nutrient incorporation, or for pest control.
Tillage varies in intensity from conventional to no-till.
It can improve productivity by warming the soil, incorporating fertilizer and controlling weeds, but also renders soil more prone to erosion, triggers the decomposition of organic matter releasing CO2, and reduces the abundance and diversity of soil organisms.
Pest control includes the management of weeds, insects, mites, and diseases.
Chemical (pesticides), biological (biocontrol), mechanical (tillage), and cultural practices are used.
Cultural practices include crop rotation, culling, cover crops, intercropping, composting, avoidance, and resistance.
Integrated pest management attempts to use all of these methods to keep pest populations below the number which would cause economic loss, and recommends pesticides as a last resort.
Nutrient management includes both the source of nutrient inputs for crop and livestock production, and the method of use of manure produced by livestock.
Nutrient inputs can be chemical inorganic fertilizers, manure, green manure, compost and minerals.
Crop nutrient use may also be managed using cultural techniques such as crop rotation or a fallow period.
Manure is used either by holding livestock where the feed crop is growing, such as in managed intensive rotational grazing, or by spreading either dry or liquid formulations of manure on cropland or pastures.
Water management is needed where rainfall is insufficient or variable, which occurs to some degree in most regions of the world.
Some farmers use irrigation to supplement rainfall.
In other areas such as the Great Plains in the US and Canada, farmers use a fallow year to conserve soil moisture for the following year.
Recent technological innovations in precision agriculture allow for water status monitoring and automate water usage, leading to more efficient management.
Agriculture represents 70% of freshwater use worldwide.
However, water withdrawal ratios for agriculture vary significantly by income level.
In least developed countries and landlocked developing countries, water withdrawal ratios for agriculture are as high as 90 percent of total water withdrawals and about 60 percent in Small Island Developing States.
According to 2014 report by the International Food Policy Research Institute, agricultural technologies will have the greatest impact on food production if adopted in combination with each other.
Using a model that assessed how eleven technologies could impact agricultural productivity, food security and trade by 2050, the International Food Policy Research Institute found that the number of people at risk from hunger could be reduced by as much as 40% and food prices could be reduced by almost half.
Payment for ecosystem services is a method of providing additional incentives to encourage farmers to conserve some aspects of the environment.
Measures might include paying for reforestation upstream of a city, to improve the supply of fresh water.
Different definitions exist for agricultural automation and for the variety of tools and technologies that are used to automate production.
One view is that agricultural automation refers to autonomous navigation by robots without human intervention.
Alternatively, it is defined as the accomplishment of production tasks through mobile, autonomous, decision-making, mechatronic devices.
However, FAO finds that these definitions do not capture all the aspects and forms of automation, such as robotic milking machines that are static, most motorized machinery that automates the performing of agricultural operations, and digital tools (e.
FAO defines agricultural automation as the use of machinery and equipment in agricultural operations to improve their diagnosis, decision-making or performing, reducing the drudgery of agricultural work or improving the timeliness, and potentially the precision, of agricultural operations.
The technological evolution in agriculture has involved a progressive move from manual tools to animal traction, to motorized mechanization, to digital equipment and finally, to robotics with artificial intelligence (AI).
Motorized mechanization using engine power automates the performance of agricultural operations such as ploughing and milking.
With digital automation technologies, it also becomes possible to automate diagnosis and decision-making of agricultural operations.
For example, autonomous crop robots can harvest and seed crops, while drones can gather information to help automate input application.
Precision agriculture often employs such automation technologies.
Motorized machines are increasingly complemented, or even superseded, by new digital equipment that automates diagnosis and decision-making.
A conventional tractor, for example, can be converted into an automated vehicle allowing it to sow a field autonomously.
Motorized mechanization has increased significantly across the world in recent years, although reliable global data with broad country coverage exist only for tractors and only up to 2009.
Sub-Saharan Africa is the only region where the adoption of motorized mechanization has stalled over the past decades.
Automation technologies are increasingly used for managing livestock, though evidence on adoption is lacking.
Global automatic milking system sales have increased over recent years, but adoption is likely mostly in Northern Europe, and likely almost absent in low- and middle-income countries.
Automated feeding machines for both cows and poultry also exist, but data and evidence regarding their adoption trends and drivers is likewise scarce.
Measuring the overall employment impacts of agricultural automation is difficult because it requires large amounts of data tracking all the transformations and the associated reallocation of workers both upstream and downstream.
While automation technologies reduce labor needs for the newly automated tasks, they also generate new labor demand for other tasks, such as equipment maintenance and operation.
Agricultural automation can also stimulate employment by allowing producers to expand production and by creating other agrifood systems jobs.
This is especially true when it happens in context of rising scarcity of rural labor, as is the case in high-income countries and many middle-income countries.
On the other hand, if forcedly promoted, for example through government subsidies in contexts of abundant rural labor, it can lead to labor displacement and falling or stagnant wages, particularly affecting poor and low-skilled workers.
Climate change and agriculture are interrelated on a global scale.
Climate change affects agriculture through changes in average temperatures, rainfall, and weather extremes (like storms and heat waves); changes in pests and diseases; changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide and ground-level ozone concentrations; changes in the nutritional quality of some foods; and changes in sea level.
Global warming is already affecting agriculture, with effects unevenly distributed across the world.
In a 2022 report, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change describes how human-induced warming has slowed growth of agricultural productivity over the past 50 years in mid and low latitudes.
Methane emissions have negatively impacted crop yields by increasing temperatures and surface ozone concentrations.
Warming is also negatively affecting crop and grassland quality and harvest stability.
Ocean warming has decreased sustainable yields of some wild fish populations while ocean acidification and warming have already affected farmed aquatic species.
Climate change will probably increase the risk of food insecurity for some vulnerable groups, such as the poor.
In order to meet the demands of a growing global population, agriculture needs to produce about 50% more food, feed and fibre by 2050 compared with the volumes it generated in 2012, according to estimates by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
Achieving such objectives will place additional pressure on the world’s already overstretched water, land and soil resources.
In an increasing number of regions, food security and agrifood systems are at risk from unsustainable natural resource management practices, urban expansion, higher demand for food, water, energy and biomaterials, and persisting social and gender inequalities in access to and governance of resources.
Crop alteration has been practiced by humankind for thousands of years, since the beginning of civilization.
Altering crops through breeding practices changes the genetic make-up of a plant to develop crops with more beneficial characteristics for humans, for example, larger fruits or seeds, drought-tolerance, or resistance to pests.
Significant advances in plant breeding ensued after the work of geneticist Gregor Mendel.
His work on dominant and recessive alleles, although initially largely ignored for almost 50 years, gave plant breeders a better understanding of genetics and breeding techniques.
Crop breeding includes techniques such as plant selection with desirable traits, self-pollination and cross-pollination, and molecular techniques that genetically modify the organism.
Domestication of plants has, over the centuries increased yield, improved disease resistance and drought tolerance, eased harvest and improved the taste and nutritional value of crop plants.
Careful selection and breeding have had enormous effects on the characteristics of crop plants.
Plant selection and breeding in the 1920s and 1930s improved pasture (grasses and clover) in New Zealand.
Extensive X-ray and ultraviolet induced mutagenesis efforts (i.
The Green Revolution popularized the use of conventional hybridization to sharply increase yield by creating "high-yielding varieties".
For example, average yields of corn (maize) in the US have increased from around 2.
Similarly, worldwide average wheat yields have increased from less than 1 t/ha in 1900 to more than 2.
South American average wheat yields are around 2 t/ha, African under 1 t/ha, and Egypt and Arabia up to 3.
In contrast, the average wheat yield in countries such as France is over 8 t/ha.
Variations in yields are due mainly to variation in climate, genetics, and the level of intensive farming techniques (use of fertilizers, chemical pest control, and growth control to avoid lodging).
Investments into innovation for agriculture are long term.
This is because it takes time for research to become commercialized and for technology to be adapted to meet multiple regions' needs, as well as meet national guidelines before being adopted and planted in a farmer's fields.
For instance, it took at least 60 years from the introduction of hybrid corn technology before its adoption became widespread.
Agricultural innovation developed for the specific agroecological conditions of one region is not easily transferred and used in another region with different agroecological conditions.
Instead, the innovation would have to be adapted to the specific conditions of that other region and respect its biodiversity and environmental requirements and guidelines.
Some such adaptations can be seen through the steadily increasing number of plant varieties protected under the plant variety protection instrument administered by the International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV).
Genetically modified organisms (GMO) are organisms whose genetic material has been altered by genetic engineering techniques generally known as recombinant DNA technology.
Genetic engineering has expanded the genes available to breeders to use in creating desired germlines for new crops.
Increased durability, nutritional content, insect and virus resistance and herbicide tolerance are a few of the attributes bred into crops through genetic engineering.
For some, GMO crops cause food safety and food labeling concerns.
Numerous countries have placed restrictions on the production, import or use of GMO foods and crops.
The Biosafety Protocol, an international treaty, regulates the trade of GMOs.
There is ongoing discussion regarding the labeling of foods made from GMOs, and the EU has had GMO food labeling requirements since 1997.
As of 2022, the United States requires food containing GMO ingredients to be labeled as well.
Herbicide-resistant seeds have a gene implanted into their genome that allows the plants to tolerate exposure to herbicides, including glyphosate.
These seeds allow the farmer to grow a crop that can be sprayed with herbicides to control weeds without harming the resistant crop.
Herbicide-tolerant crops are used by farmers worldwide.
With the increasing use of herbicide-tolerant crops, comes an increase in the use of glyphosate-based herbicide sprays.
In some areas glyphosate resistant weeds have developed, causing farmers to switch to other herbicides.
Some studies also link widespread glyphosate usage to iron deficiencies in some crops, which is both a crop production and a nutritional quality concern, with potential economic and health implications.
Other GMO crops used by growers include insect-resistant crops, which have a gene from the soil bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt), which produces a toxin specific to insects.
These crops resist damage by insects.
Some believe that similar or better pest-resistance traits can be acquired through traditional breeding practices, and resistance to various pests can be gained through hybridization or cross-pollination with wild species.
In some cases, wild species are the primary source of resistance traits; some tomato cultivars that have gained resistance to at least 19 diseases did so through crossing with wild populations of tomatoes.
Agriculture is both a cause of environmental degradation and sensitive to environmental degradation, such as biodiversity loss, desertification, soil degradation and climate change, which cause decreases in crop yield.
Agriculture is one of the most important drivers of environmental pressures, particularly habitat change, climate change, water use and toxic emissions.
Agriculture is the main source of toxins released into the environment, including insecticides, especially those used on cotton.
The 2011 UNEP Green Economy report stated that agricultural operations produced some 13 percent of anthropogenic global greenhouse gas emissions.
This includes gases from the use of inorganic fertilizers, agro-chemical pesticides, and herbicides, as well as fossil fuel-energy inputs.
Agriculture imposes multiple external costs upon society through effects such as pesticide damage to nature (especially herbicides and insecticides), nutrient runoff, excessive water usage, and loss of natural environment.
A 2000 assessment of agriculture in the UK determined total external costs for 1996 of £2,343 million, or £208 per hectare.
A 2005 analysis of these costs in the US concluded that cropland imposes approximately $5 to $16 billion ($30 to $96 per hectare), while livestock production imposes $714 million.
Both studies, which focused solely on the fiscal impacts, concluded that more should be done to internalize external costs.
Neither included subsidies in their analysis, but they noted that subsidies also influence the cost of agriculture to society.
Agriculture seeks to increase yield and to reduce costs, often employing measures that cut biodiversity to very low levels.
Yield increases with inputs such as fertilizers and removal of pathogens, predators, and competitors (such as weeds).
Costs decrease with increasing scale of farm units, such as making fields larger; this means removing hedges, ditches and other areas of habitat.
Pesticides kill insects, plants and fungi.
Effective yields fall with on-farm losses, which may be caused by poor production practices during harvesting, handling, and storage.
The environmental effects of climate change show that research on pests and diseases that do not generally afflict areas is essential.
In 2021, farmers discovered stem rust on wheat in the Champagne area of France, a disease that had previously only occurred in Morocco for 20 to 30 years.
Because of climate change, insects that used to die off over the winter are now alive and multiplying.
A senior UN official, Henning Steinfeld, said that "Livestock are one of the most significant contributors to today's most serious environmental problems".
Livestock production occupies 70% of all land used for agriculture, or 30% of the land surface of the planet.
It is one of the largest sources of greenhouse gases, responsible for 18% of the world's greenhouse gas emissions as measured in CO2 equivalents.
By comparison, all transportation emits 13.
Livestock expansion is cited as a key factor driving deforestation; in the Amazon basin 70% of previously forested area is now occupied by pastures and the remainder used for feed crops.
Through deforestation and land degradation, livestock is also driving reductions in biodiversity.
A well documented phenomenon is woody plant encroachment, caused by overgrazing in rangelands.
Furthermore, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) states that "methane emissions from global livestock are projected to increase by 60 percent by 2030 under current practices and consumption patterns.
Land transformation, the use of land to yield goods and services, is the most substantial way humans alter the Earth's ecosystems, and is the driving force causing biodiversity loss.
Estimates of the amount of land transformed by humans vary from 39 to 50%.
It is estimated that 24% of land globally experiences land degradation, a long-term decline in ecosystem function and productivity, with cropland being disproportionately affected.
Land management is the driving factor behind degradation; 1.
Degradation can be through deforestation, desertification, soil erosion, mineral depletion, acidification, or salinization.
In 2021, the global agricultural land area was 4.
Between 2000 and 2021, roughly two-thirds of agricultural land were used for permanent meadows and pastures (3.
One-third of the total agricultural land was cropland (1.
Eutrophication, excessive nutrient enrichment in aquatic ecosystems resulting in algal blooms and anoxia, leads to fish kills, loss of biodiversity, and renders water unfit for drinking and other industrial uses.
Excessive fertilization and manure application to cropland, as well as high livestock stocking densities cause nutrient (mainly nitrogen and phosphorus) runoff and leaching from agricultural land.
These nutrients are major nonpoint pollutants contributing to eutrophication of aquatic ecosystems and pollution of groundwater, with harmful effects on human populations.
Fertilizers also reduce terrestrial biodiversity by increasing competition for light, favoring those species that are able to benefit from the added nutrients.
Agriculture simultaneously is facing growing freshwater demand and precipitation anomalies (droughts, floods, and extreme rainfall and weather events) on rainfed areas fields and grazing lands.
Agriculture accounts for 70 percent of withdrawals of freshwater resources, and an estimated 41 percent of current global irrigation water use occurs at the expense of environmental flow requirements.
It is long known that aquifers in areas as diverse as northern China, the Upper Ganges and the western US are being depleted, and new research extends these problems to aquifers in Iran, Mexico and Saudi Arabia.
Increasing pressure is being placed on water resources by industry and urban areas, meaning that water scarcity is increasing and agriculture is facing the challenge of producing more food for the world's growing population with reduced water resources.
While industrial withdrawals have declined in the past few decades and municipal withdrawals have increased only marginally since 2010, agricultural withdrawals have continued to grow at an ever faster pace.
Agricultural water usage can also cause major environmental problems, including the destruction of natural wetlands, the spread of water-borne diseases, and land degradation through salinization and waterlogging, when irrigation is performed incorrectly.
Pesticide use has increased since 1950 to 2.
The World Health Organization estimated in 1992 that three million pesticide poisonings occur annually, causing 220,000 deaths.
Pesticides select for pesticide resistance in the pest population, leading to a condition termed the "pesticide treadmill" in which pest resistance warrants the development of a new pesticide.
An alternative argument is that the way to "save the environment" and prevent famine is by using pesticides and intensive high yield farming, a view exemplified by a quote heading the Center for Global Food Issues website: 'Growing more per acre leaves more land for nature'.
However, critics argue that a trade-off between the environment and a need for food is not inevitable, and that pesticides can replace good agronomic practices such as crop rotation.
The Push–pull agricultural pest management technique involves intercropping, using plant aromas to repel pests from crops (push) and to lure them to a place from which they can then be removed (pull).
Agriculture contributes towards climate change through greenhouse gas emissions and by the conversion of non-agricultural land such as forests into agricultural land.
The agriculture, forestry and land use sector contribute between 13% and 21% of global greenhouse gas emissions.
Emissions of nitrous oxide, methane make up over half of total greenhouse gas emission from agriculture.
Animal husbandry is a major source of greenhouse gas emissions.
Approximately 57% of global GHG emissions from the production of food are from the production of animal-based food while plant-based foods contribute 29% and the remaining 14% is for other utilizations.
Farmland management and land-use change represented major shares of total emissions (38% and 29%, respectively), whereas rice and beef were the largest contributing plant- and animal-based commodities (12% and 25%, respectively).
South and Southeast Asia and South America were the largest emitters of production-based GHGs.
Climate change put significant part of crops in danger already at 1.
While in North America, Europe and central Asia the share of endangered crops is relatively little at this level of warming, in the Middle east and North Africa region for example, close to 50% of cropland is in danger.
With further temperature rise the risk increase in all regions, in some more, in some less.
Globally the cropland area in safe climatic zone decrease for all the major crop groups as warming exceed 1.
Current farming methods have resulted in over-stretched water resources, high levels of erosion and reduced soil fertility.
There is not enough water to continue farming using current practices; therefore how water, land, and ecosystem resources are used to boost crop yields must be reconsidered.
A solution would be to give value to ecosystems, recognizing environmental and livelihood tradeoffs, and balancing the rights of a variety of users and interests.
Inequities that result when such measures are adopted would need to be addressed, such as the reallocation of water from poor to rich, the clearing of land to make way for more productive farmland, or the preservation of a wetland system that limits fishing rights.
Technological advancements help provide farmers with tools and resources to make farming more sustainable.
Technology permits innovations like conservation tillage, a farming process which helps prevent land loss to erosion, reduces water pollution, and enhances carbon sequestration.
Agricultural automation can help address some of the challenges associated with climate change and thus facilitate adaptation efforts.
For example, the application of digital automation technologies (e.
Moreover, when applied to sensing and early warning, they can help address the uncertainty and unpredictability of weather conditions associated with accelerating climate change.
Other potential sustainable practices include conservation agriculture, agroforestry, improved grazing, avoided grassland conversion, and biochar.
Current mono-crop farming practices in the United States preclude widespread adoption of sustainable practices, such as 2–3 crop rotations that incorporate grass or hay with annual crops, unless negative emission goals such as soil carbon sequestration become policy.
The food demand of Earth's projected population, with current climate change predictions, could be satisfied by improvement of agricultural methods, expansion of agricultural areas, and a sustainability-oriented consumer mindset.
Since the 1940s, agricultural productivity has increased dramatically, due largely to the increased use of energy-intensive mechanization, fertilizers and pesticides.
The vast majority of this energy input comes from fossil fuel sources.
Between the 1960s and the 1980s, the Green Revolution transformed agriculture around the globe, with world grain production increasing significantly (between 70% and 390% for wheat and 60% to 150% for rice, depending on geographic area) as world population doubled.
Heavy reliance on petrochemicals has raised concerns that oil shortages could increase costs and reduce agricultural output.
Industrialized agriculture depends on fossil fuels in two fundamental ways: direct consumption on the farm and manufacture of inputs used on the farm.
Direct consumption includes the use of lubricants and fuels to operate farm vehicles and machinery.
Indirect consumption includes the manufacture of fertilizers, pesticides, and farm machinery.
In particular, the production of nitrogen fertilizer can account for over half of agricultural energy usage.
Together, direct and indirect consumption by US farms accounts for about 2% of the nation's energy use.
Direct and indirect energy consumption by US farms peaked in 1979, and has since gradually declined.
Food systems encompass not just agriculture but off-farm processing, packaging, transporting, marketing, consumption, and disposal of food and food-related items.
Agriculture accounts for less than one-fifth of food system energy use in the US.
Plastic products are used extensively in agriculture, including to increase crop yields and improve the efficiency of water and agrichemical use.
The polymers most commonly used in these products are low-density polyethylene (LPDE), linear low-density polyethylene (LLDPE), polypropylene (PP) and polyvinyl chloride (PVC).
The total amount of plastics used in agriculture is difficult to quantify.
A 2012 study reported that almost 6.
Widespread use of plastic mulch and lack of systematic collection and management have led to the generation of large amounts of mulch residue.
Weathering and degradation eventually cause the mulch to fragment.
These fragments and larger pieces of plastic accumulate in soil.
Mulch residue has been measured at levels of 50 to 260 kg per hectare in topsoil in areas where mulch use dates back more than 10 years, which confirms that mulching is a major source of both microplastic and macroplastic soil contamination.
Agricultural plastics, especially plastic films, are not easy to recycle because of high contamination levels (up to 40–50% by weight contamination by pesticides, fertilizers, soil and debris, moist vegetation, silage juice water, and UV stabilizers) and collection difficulties .
Therefore, they are often buried or abandoned in fields and watercourses or burned.
These disposal practices lead to soil degradation and can result in contamination of soils and leakage of microplastics into the marine environment as a result of precipitation run-off and tidal washing.
In addition, additives in residual plastic film (such as UV and thermal stabilizers) may have deleterious effects on crop growth, soil structure, nutrient transport and salt levels.
There is a risk that plastic mulch will deteriorate soil quality, deplete soil organic matter stocks, increase soil water repellence and emit greenhouse gases.
Microplastics released through fragmentation of agricultural plastics can absorb and concentrate contaminants capable of being passed up the trophic chain.
Agricultural economics is economics as it relates to the "production, distribution and consumption of [agricultural] goods and services".
Combining agricultural production with general theories of marketing and business as a discipline of study began in the late 1800s, and grew significantly through the 20th century.
Although the study of agricultural economics is relatively recent, major trends in agriculture have significantly affected national and international economies throughout history, ranging from tenant farmers and sharecropping in the post–American Civil War Southern United States to the European feudal system of manorialism.
In the United States, and elsewhere, food costs attributed to food processing, distribution, and agricultural marketing, sometimes referred to as the value chain, have risen while the costs attributed to farming have declined.
This is related to the greater efficiency of farming, combined with the increased level of value addition (e.
Market concentration has increased in the sector as well, and although the total effect of the increased market concentration is likely increased efficiency, the changes redistribute economic surplus from producers (farmers) and consumers, and may have negative implications for rural communities.
National government policies, such as taxation, subsidies, tariffs and others, can significantly change the economic marketplace for agricultural products.
Since at least the 1960s, a combination of trade restrictions, exchange rate policies and subsidies have affected farmers in both the developing and the developed world.
In the 1980s, non-subsidized farmers in developing countries experienced adverse effects from national policies that created artificially low global prices for farm products.
Between the mid-1980s and the early 2000s, several international agreements limited agricultural tariffs, subsidies and other trade restrictions.
However, as of 2009, there was still a significant amount of policy-driven distortion in global agricultural product prices.
The three agricultural products with the most trade distortion were sugar, milk and rice, mainly due to taxation.
Among the oilseeds, sesame had the most taxation, but overall, feed grains and oilseeds had much lower levels of taxation than livestock products.
Since the 1980s, policy-driven distortions have decreases more among livestock products than crops during the worldwide reforms in agricultural policy.
Despite this progress, certain crops, such as cotton, still see subsidies in developed countries artificially deflating global prices, causing hardship in developing countries with non-subsidized farmers.
Unprocessed commodities such as corn, soybeans, and cattle are generally graded to indicate quality, affecting the price the producer receives.
Commodities are generally reported by production quantities, such as volume, number or weight.
Agricultural science is a broad multidisciplinary field of biology that encompasses the parts of exact, natural, economic and social sciences used in the practice and understanding of agriculture.
It covers topics such as agronomy, plant breeding and genetics, plant pathology, crop modeling, soil science, entomology, production techniques and improvement, study of pests and their management, and study of adverse environmental effects such as soil degradation, waste management, and bioremediation.
The scientific study of agriculture began in the 18th century, when Johann Friedrich Mayer conducted experiments on the use of gypsum (hydrated calcium sulphate) as a fertilizer.
Research became more systematic when in 1843, John Lawes and Henry Gilbert began a set of long-term agronomy field experiments at Rothamsted Research Station in England; some of them, such as the Park Grass Experiment, are still running.
In America, the Hatch Act of 1887 provided funding for what it was the first to call "agricultural science", driven by farmers' interest in fertilizers.
In agricultural entomology, the USDA began to research biological control in 1881; it instituted its first large program in 1905, searching Europe and Japan for natural enemies of the spongy moth and brown-tail moth, establishing parasitoids (such as solitary wasps) and predators of both pests in the US.
Agricultural policy is the set of government decisions and actions relating to domestic agriculture and imports of foreign agricultural products.
Governments usually implement agricultural policies with the goal of achieving a specific outcome in the domestic agricultural product markets.
Some overarching themes include risk management and adjustment (including policies related to climate change, food safety and natural disasters), economic stability (including policies related to taxes), natural resources and environmental sustainability (especially water policy), research and development, and market access for domestic commodities (including relations with global organizations and agreements with other countries).
Agricultural policy can also touch on food quality, ensuring that the food supply is of a consistent and known quality, food security, ensuring that the food supply meets the population's needs, and conservation.
Policy programs can range from financial programs, such as subsidies, to encouraging producers to enroll in voluntary quality assurance programs.
A 2021 report finds that globally, support to agricultural producers accounts for almost US$540 billion a year.
This amounts to 15 percent of total agricultural production value, and is heavily biased towards measures that are leading to inefficiency, as well as are unequally distributed and harmful for the environment and human health.
Crop use in animal agriculture accounts for one form of inefficiency.
Animal agriculture’s estimated land use to produce one kilocalorie or gram of protein is 50 to 100 times that of plant-based alternatives.
Furthermore, the larger the livestock, the lower the energy efficiency (kilocalories obtained relative to kilocalories the animal consumes).
For instance, beef's energy efficiency is estimated to be 2%.
There are many influences on the creation of agricultural policy, including consumers, agribusiness, trade lobbies and other groups.
Agribusiness interests hold a large amount of influence over policy making, in the form of lobbying and campaign contributions.
Political action groups, including those interested in environmental issues and labor unions, also provide influence, as do lobbying organizations representing individual agricultural commodities.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) leads international efforts to defeat hunger and provides a forum for the negotiation of global agricultural regulations and agreements.
Samuel Jutzi, director of FAO's animal production and health division, states that lobbying by large corporations has stopped reforms that would improve human health and the environment.
For example, proposals in 2010 for a voluntary code of conduct for the livestock industry that would have provided incentives for improving standards for health, and environmental regulations, such as the number of animals an area of land can support without long-term damage, were successfully defeated due to large food company pressure.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY 4.
Text taken from The State of Food and Agriculture 2025​, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY 4.
Text taken from The State of the World’s Land and Water Resources for Food and Agriculture 2025​, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY 4.
Text taken from The Impact of Disasters on Agriculture and Food Security 2025​, The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Acquaah, George (2002).
Principles of Crop Production: Theory, Techniques, and Technology.
ISBN 978-0-13-022133-9.
Chrispeels, Maarten J.
Plants, Genes, and Agriculture.
Boston, Massachusetts: Jones and Bartlett.
ISBN 978-0-86720-871-9.
Needham, Joseph (1986).
Science and Civilization in China.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.
Text taken from Drowning in Plastics – Marine Litter and Plastic Waste Vital Graphics​, United Nations Environment Programme.
This article incorporates text from a free content work (license statement/permission).
Text taken from In Brief: The State of Food and Agriculture 2019.
Moving forward on food loss and waste reduction​, FAO, FAO.
This article incorporates text from a free content work (license statement/permission).
Text taken from In Brief to The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2022.
Repurposing food and agricultural policies to make healthy diets more affordable​, FAO.
This article incorporates text from a free content work (license statement/permission).
Text taken from In Brief: The State of Food and Agriculture 2018.
Migration, agriculture and rural development​, FAO, FAO.
This article incorporates text from a free content work (license statement/permission).
Text taken from In Brief to The State of Food and Agriculture 2022.
Leveraging automation in agriculture for transforming agrifood systems​, FAO, FAO.
This article incorporates text from a free content work (license statement/permission).
Text taken from Enabling inclusive agricultural automation​, FAO, FAO.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.
Text taken from The status of women in agrifood systems – Overview​, FAO, FAO.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY-SA IGO 3.
Text taken from World Food and Agriculture – Statistical Yearbook 2023​, FAO, FAO.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY 4.
Text taken from World Intellectual Property Report 2024 - The importance of local capabilities in AgTech specialization​, WIPO, WIPO.
A printing press is a mechanical device for applying pressure to an inked surface resting upon a print medium (such as paper or cloth), thereby transferring the ink.
It marked a dramatic improvement on earlier printing methods, in which the medium was brushed or rubbed repeatedly to achieve the transfer of ink.
The invention and global spread of the printing press was one of the most influential events in the second millennium.
In Germany, around 1440, the goldsmith Johannes Gutenberg invented the movable-type printing press, which started the Printing Revolution.
Modeled on the design of existing screw presses, a single Renaissance printing press could produce up to 3,600 pages per workday, compared to forty by hand-printing and a few by hand-copying.
Gutenberg's newly devised hand mould made possible the rapid creation of metal movable type in large quantities.
From Mainz, the press spread within several decades to over 200 cities in a dozen European countries.
By 1500, presses in operation throughout Western Europe had produced more than 20 million volumes.
The operation of a press became synonymous with the enterprise of printing and lent its name to a new medium of expression and communication, "the press".
The spread of the printing press introduced the era of mass communication, which altered the structure of European society.
The relatively unrestricted circulation of information and ideas transcended borders, spread rapidly during the Reformation, and supported the collaborative networks of the Scientific Revolution.
A sharp increase in literacy broke the monopoly of the literate elite on education and learning and strengthened the emerging middle class.
As works were increasingly published in vernacular languages rather than Latin, printed texts helped to standardize the spelling and syntax of national languages.
Although the basic design of the wooden handpress remained largely unchanged for more than three centuries, the Industrial Revolution brought fundamental change.
By 1800, Lord Stanhope had built the first press entirely from cast iron, doubling the printed area and output.
In the 1810s, Friedrich Koenig introduced steam power and the rotary motion of cylinders, and his presses were adopted by The Times in 1814.
The steam-powered rotary printing press, invented by Richard M.
Hoe in 1843, allowed millions of copies of a page to be produced in a single day.
During the twentieth century, offset printing, phototypesetting, and digital printing successively replaced the letterpress method for most commercial applications.
The economic and cultural changes of late medieval Europe helped to create conditions in which Gutenberg's printing press could succeed commercially.
The growth of trade and commerce had expanded the urban middle class, while the multiplication of universities from the twelfth century onward had increased demand for books.
Hand-copying was slow and expensive, and by the fifteenth century the supply of manuscripts fell far short of this growing demand.
Gutenberg's press combined four pre-existing technologies that had each reached a level of development sufficient for printing by the mid-fifteenth century: the screw press, movable type, the codex book format, and mechanized paper production.
Gutenberg integrated these into a single working system and added a number of innovations of his own, including a hand mould for casting type and an oil-based ink suited to metal type.
The first of these was the screw press, which allowed direct pressure to be applied on a flat plane.
It was already of great antiquity in Gutenberg's time and was used for a wide range of tasks.
Introduced in the 1st century AD by the Romans, it was commonly employed in agricultural production for pressing grapes for wine and olives for oil.
The device was also used from very early on in urban contexts as a cloth press for printing patterns.
Gutenberg may have also been inspired by the paper presses which had spread through the German lands since the late 14th century and which worked on the same mechanical principles.
Gutenberg adopted the basic design, thereby mechanizing the printing process.
Printing, however, put a demand on the machine quite different from pressing.
Gutenberg adapted the construction so that the pressing power exerted by the platen on the paper was now applied both evenly and with the required sudden elasticity.
To speed up the printing process, he introduced a movable undertable with a plane surface on which the sheets could be swiftly changed.
The second element, movable type, existed in some form prior to 15th century Europe; sporadic evidence that the typographical principle, the idea of creating a text by reusing individual characters, was known and had been cropping up since the 12th century and possibly before (the oldest known application dating back as far as the Phaistos disc).
The first movable type was invented by Chinese engineer Bi Sheng in the 11th century during the Song dynasty, and a book dating to 1193 recorded the first copper movable type.
Woodblock printing remained the dominant technique in East Asia.
The oldest printed book using metal movable type was the Jikji, printed in Korea in 1377 during the Goryeo era.
Other notable examples include the Prüfening inscription from Germany, letter tiles from England and Altarpiece of Pellegrino II in Italy.
However, the various techniques employed (imprinting, punching and assembling individual letters) did not have the refinement and efficiency needed to become widely accepted.
Tsuen-Hsuin and Needham, and Briggs and Burke suggest that the movable-type printing in China and Korea was rarely employed, in part because the large number of characters in logographic writing systems made movable type less practical than in alphabetic systems.
Gutenberg's use of the Latin alphabet was a practical advantage in this respect because it allowed the type-setter to represent any text with a relatively small set of characters.
The third element was the codex book format, which had originated in the Roman period.
Considered the most important advance in the history of the book prior to printing itself, the codex had completely replaced the ancient scroll at the onset of the Middle Ages (AD 500).
The codex holds considerable practical advantages over the scroll format: it is more convenient to read (by turning pages), more compact, and less costly, and both recto and verso sides could be used for writing or printing, unlike the scroll.
The fourth element was paper.
Medieval papermakers had succeeded in mechanizing paper manufacture: the introduction of water-powered paper mills, the first certain evidence of which dates to 1282, allowed for a massive expansion of production and replaced the laborious handcraft characteristic of both Chinese and Muslim papermaking.
Papermaking centers began to multiply in the late 13th century in Italy, reducing the price of paper to one-sixth of parchment and then falling further.
Papermaking centers reached Germany a century later.
Despite this it appears that the final breakthrough of paper depended just as much on the rapid spread of movable-type printing.
Codices of parchment, which in terms of quality is superior to any other writing material, still had a substantial share in Gutenberg's edition of the 42-line Bible.
After much experimentation, Gutenberg managed to overcome the difficulties which traditional water-based inks caused by soaking the paper, and found the formula for an oil-based ink suitable for high-quality printing with metal type.
Gutenberg's work on the printing press began in approximately 1436 when he partnered with Andreas Dritzehn, who had previously instructed in gem-cutting, and Andreas Heilmann, owner of a paper mill.
However, it was not until a 1439 lawsuit against Gutenberg that an official record existed; witnesses' testimony discussed Gutenberg's types, an inventory of metals (including lead), and his type molds.
Having previously worked as a professional goldsmith, Gutenberg made skillful use of the knowledge of metals he had learned as a craftsman.
He was the first to make type from an alloy of lead, tin, and antimony, which was critical for producing durable type that produced high-quality printed books and proved to be much better suited for printing than all other known materials.
To create these lead types, Gutenberg used what is considered one of his most ingenious inventions, a special matrix enabling the quick and precise molding of new type blocks from a uniform template.
His type case is estimated to have contained around 290 separate letter boxes, most of which were required for special characters, ligatures, punctuation marks, and so forth.
Gutenberg is also credited with the introduction of an oil-based ink which was more durable than the previously used water-based inks.
As printing material he used both paper and vellum (high-quality parchment).
In the Gutenberg Bible, Gutenberg made a trial of color printing for a few of the page headings, present only in some copies.
A later work, the Mainz Psalter of 1453, presumably designed by Gutenberg but published under the imprint of his successors Johann Fust and Peter Schöffer, had elaborate red and blue printed initials.
A printing press, in its classical form, is a standing mechanism, ranging from 5 to 7 feet (1.
A compositor set the small individual metal letters known as type into the desired lines of text.
Several lines were arranged at once and placed in a wooden frame known as a galley.
Once the correct number of pages were composed, the galleys were laid face up in a frame called a forme, which was placed onto a flat stone known as the bed.
The type was inked using two ink balls, pads of leather stuffed with wool or horsehair and mounted on wooden handles.
The leather was usually sheepskin, though calfskin and dogskin were also used.
The ink was distributed evenly by pressing the two balls together before applying them to the type.
A sheet of dampened paper was placed on the tympan and held in position with small pins.
A frisket, a thin frame covered in paper with cut-out apertures matching the type, was folded over the sheet to protect the margins from ink.
The tympan and frisket were then folded down so that the paper lay on the inked type.
The bed was rolled under the platen using a windlass mechanism operated by a small handle called the rounce.
The impression was made by turning a long handle known as the bar, which drove a screw to press the platen onto the paper.
The springiness of the tympan assembly caused the bar to spring back after each pull.
The bed was then wound out, the tympan and frisket opened, and the printed sheet removed.
Such presses were worked entirely by hand until the development of iron presses after around 1800, some of which could be operated by steam power.
The printing revolution occurred when the spread of the printing press facilitated the wide circulation of information and ideas, a process that Eisenstein termed an "agent of change" in the societies that it reached.
Its consequences included the mass production of books, shifts in reading habits and the relationship between authors and texts, the decline of Latin as the language of scholarship, and new economic patterns in the book trade.
The invention of mechanical movable type printing led to a rapid increase of printing activities across Europe within only a few decades.
Demand for bibles and other religious literature was one of the main drivers of the very rapid initial expansion of printing.
From a single print shop in Mainz, Germany, printing had spread to around 270 cities in Central, Western and Eastern Europe by the end of the 15th century.
As early as 1480, there were printers active in 110 different places in Germany, Italy, France, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, England, Bohemia and Poland.
The historians Lucien Febvre and Henri-Jean Martin conclude that by this date the printed book was in universal use in Europe.
In Italy, a center of early printing, print shops had been established in 77 cities and towns by 1500.
At the end of the following century, 151 locations in Italy had seen at one time printing activities, with a total of nearly three thousand printers known to be active.
Despite this proliferation, printing centers soon emerged; thus, one third of the Italian printers published in Venice.
By 1500, the printing presses in operation throughout Western Europe had already produced more than twenty million copies.
In the following century, their output rose tenfold to an estimated 150 to 200 million copies.
European printing presses of around 1600 were capable of producing between 1,500 and 3,600 impressions per workday.
By comparison, Far Eastern printing, where the back of the paper was manually rubbed to the page, did not exceed an output of forty pages per day.
The scale of the new industry can be seen in individual sales figures: of Erasmus's work, at least 750,000 copies were sold during his lifetime alone (1469–1536).
In the early days of the Reformation, the volume of bulk printing took princes and papacy alike by surprise.
In 1518 and 1519, Martin Luther became Europe's most published author; his 45 original works, written in both Latin and German, were reprinted by printers across Germany and reached a total of 291 editions.
Many were short pamphlets of eight pages or fewer, which could be produced cheaply and distributed quickly.
In the period from 1518 to 1524, the publication of books in Germany alone rose sevenfold; between 1518 and 1520, Luther's tracts were distributed in 300,000 printed copies.
The rapidity of typographical text production, as well as the sharp fall in unit costs, led to the issuing of the first newspapers (see Relation), which provided a new means of conveying up-to-date information to the public.
Pettegree argues that the market for printed news grew directly out of the Reformation: printers who had built a readership through Luther's pamphlets sustained it by producing news sheets covering battles, natural disasters, and public affairs.
These news pamphlets closely resembled the Reformation Flugschriften in format, typically running to four or eight pages in quarto.
In the early seventeenth century, a German publisher began issuing bulletins of news on a regular schedule, creating the first weekly newspaper; the format spread through German cities and remained the principal news medium of northern Europe for over a century.
Surviving pre-16th century print works, known as incunable, are collected by many of the libraries in Europe and North America.
Beyond Europe, the printing press spread primarily through colonial and missionary networks.
Jesuit missionaries established the first press in Asia at Goa in 1556, where João de Bustamante served as the first printer; the press had originally been intended for Abyssinia but remained in Goa after the patriarch-designate was persuaded to stay during a stopover.
The Portuguese Jesuit Diogo de Mesquita acquired a press during a visit to Europe in 1586 and established it at Nagasaki, where it produced ecclesiastical works in Japanese until his death in 1614.
In the Philippines, the Dominicans set up the first press, which published the Doctrina Christiana in 1593.
In the Ottoman Empire, non-Muslim communities operated presses from an early date: Sephardi Jews established a Hebrew press in Constantinople in 1493, followed by an Armenian press in 1567 and a Greek press in 1627.
The first press to print in Arabic script for a Muslim readership was established by İbrahim Müteferrika in 1729, producing seventeen works before 1742.
In the Americas, the printer Juan Pablos established the first press in Mexico City in 1539, working on behalf of the Seville-based publisher Juan Cromberger; a press was established in the British colonies at Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 1638.
Although the basic design of the wooden handpress remained recognizable throughout its long history, its construction and performance improved considerably between the fifteenth and eighteenth centuries.
Wooden screws were replaced by metal ones, probably by around 1550, and the tympan and frisket were adopted as standard fittings.
Around 1620, the Dutch cartographer and printer Willem Blaeu introduced a press with a more advanced hose arrangement and a more reliable mechanism for moving the type form into position beneath the platen.
Joseph Moxon, writing in the 1680s, considered the Blaeu press superior to the English presses then in use.
Further refinements followed over the next two centuries: wooden components were progressively reinforced or replaced with metal, the straight lever bar was bent into a curve so that the pressman could swing it more easily, and the screw dimensions were adjusted to suit particular press sizes.
By the closing years of the wooden-press era, the Ramage press incorporated a mechanism that returned the platen automatically after each impression, replacing the less reliable rebound action of earlier designs.
Clapham estimates that the cumulative effect of these improvements raised the productivity of the press by a factor of three or four between the printing of the Gutenberg Bible and the late sixteenth century.
At the dawn of the Industrial Revolution, the mechanics of the hand-operated Gutenberg-style press were still essentially unchanged, although new materials in its construction, among other innovations, had gradually improved its printing efficiency.
By 1800, Lord Stanhope had built a press completely from cast iron which reduced the force required by 90%, while doubling the size of the printed area.
With a capacity of 480 pages per hour, the Stanhope press doubled the output of the old-style press.
Two ideas altered the design of the printing press radically: first, the use of steam power for running the machinery, and second the replacement of the printing flatbed with the rotary motion of cylinders.
Both elements were for the first time successfully implemented by the German printer Friedrich Koenig in a series of press designs devised between 1802 and 1818.
Having moved to London in 1804, Koenig soon met Thomas Bensley and secured financial support for his project in 1807.
Patented in 1810, Koenig had designed a steam press "much like a hand press connected to a steam engine.
He produced his machine with assistance from German engineer Andreas Friedrich Bauer.
In 1814, Koenig and Bauer sold two of their first models to The Times in London, capable of 1,100 impressions per hour.
The first edition so printed was on 28 November 1814.
They improved the early model so that it could print on both sides of a sheet at once, beginning the long process of making newspapers available to a mass audience.
The steam-powered rotary printing press, invented in 1843 in the United States by Richard M.
Hoe, ultimately allowed millions of copies of a page to be produced in a single day.
Mass production of printed works flourished after the transition to rolled paper, as continuous feed allowed the presses to run at a much faster pace.
Hoe's original design operated at up to 2,000 revolutions per hour where each revolution deposited 4 page images, giving the press a throughput of 8,000 pages per hour.
By 1891, The New York World and Philadelphia Item were operating presses producing either 90,000 4-page sheets per hour or 48,000 8-page sheets.
In the middle of the 19th century, a separate class of jobbing presses emerged for small-format commercial work such as cards, billheads, and leaflets.
The modern platen jobber descended from presses built by Stephen P.
Ruggles in Boston from the 1830s and was refined by George Phineas Gordon, whose Franklin press captured so much of the market that by 1894 at least eleven firms were manufacturing Gordon-type presses.
Moran estimates that between 1840 and 1940 no fewer than 120 different kinds of treadle-driven jobbers were made in the United States alone.
In its development, the jobbing platen played an important part in the transformation of the printing trade, speeding the production of the mass of small items required by industry and commerce.
During the twentieth century, printing technology moved beyond the letterpress principle.
Offset printing, which transfers an image from a plate to a rubber blanket and then to paper, was developed in the early 1900s and had become the dominant commercial printing method by mid-century, valued for its speed and consistent image quality on large runs.
The introduction of phototypesetting in the 1960s and 1970s replaced hot-metal type composition with photographic methods, and the spread of desktop publishing software from the mid-1980s shifted much of the typesetting process to personal computers.
By the early twenty-first century, digital printing had made short-run and on-demand production commercially viable, while offset remained the standard for high-volume work.
The printing press changed the relationship between authors and their texts.
Because each copy of a printed edition was identical, it became possible for the first time to cite references precisely, and the identity and exact wording of an author mattered in ways it had not when scribal copies of the same work varied between cities.
For many works produced before the printing press, the name of the author has been entirely lost.
The consistency of the printed page also encouraged the adoption of page numbering, tables of contents and indices as standard features of books, though all three had existed in some manuscript traditions.
Reading habits shifted in parallel.
Eisenstein describes a gradual transition "from a hearing public to a reading public" as printed texts, cheaper and more widely available than manuscripts, encouraged silent and private reading over the communal oral recitation that had been common in medieval settings.
She argues that this new reading public differed in kind from earlier audiences.
Where a sermon or speech had required listeners to gather in one place at one time, a printed text could be read alone, in private, by people scattered across a city or a continent.
The reading public was therefore more dispersed than a hearing public, and also more atomistic and individualistic: its members were often unknown to each other, and their links were impersonal ones formed through bookshops, coffeehouses, reading rooms and subscription lists rather than through physical assembly.
Pamphlets and news-sheets could reach this dispersed audience directly, allowing arguments to circulate without the mediation of preachers, lecturers or town criers.
Eisenstein adds that classical models of citizenship, which envisaged orators addressing assembled crowds in the public square, suited such a public less well than they had suited the audiences of the ancient world.
Over the following two centuries, the wider availability of printed material contributed to a rise in adult literacy across Europe, though the pace of change varied between regions.
By the end of the fifteenth century, editions of the major classical authors had been printed and circulated throughout Europe, and the printed book had come to play a central role in the diffusion of classical literature.
Between 1495 and 1515, the Venetian printer Aldus Manutius, drawing on the knowledge of Greek scholars who had arrived in Italy following the collapse of the Byzantine Empire, published the greater part of surviving Greek literature in printed editions; without the press, the equivalent recovery of Latin texts had taken over a century.
Book production became increasingly commercial, and the first copyright laws were passed.
The press also changed how scholars worked.
Eisenstein argues that historians of science have undervalued the role of printing in the Scientific Revolution: although Latin scientific treatises rarely became bestsellers, the shift from script to print preceded the conceptual revolutions of the sixteenth century rather than following them.
In her account, Ptolemy's Almagest had remained authoritative as an astronomical text for some fourteen hundred years, whereas Copernicus's De revolutionibus (1543) was surpassed in less than a hundred.
The difference, she argues, lay less in the genius of individual investigators than in the replacement of scribe by printer: printed editions of classical and contemporary texts allowed natural philosophers to compare different versions of a text systematically, to identify accumulated copyists' errors, and to build on each other's observations across a wider geographical range than scribal exchange could reach.
Several features later associated with the modern scientific community had already begun to take shape in the era of incunabula, well before the appearance of the first learned journals in the late seventeenth century: serial publication of new findings, the preservation of data across generations, a shift from professional secrecy to public disclosure, and feedback between informed readers and responsive authors and editors.
Eisenstein also stresses the role of repeatable images.
Hand-copied medical and botanical illustrations had degenerated over time, with the result that classical authorities had warned against trusting pictures and counselled direct inspection of nature.
Printed anatomical plates, herbal woodcuts and star charts could be reproduced without further loss of detail, allowing observers such as Andreas Vesalius to disseminate carefully drawn figures alongside their texts and making cumulative correction of the visual record possible for the first time.
Rulers and governments adapted quickly to the new medium.
Princes who had previously relied on manuscript proclamations turned to print to publish declarations of war, treaties and disputed points of policy in pamphlet form.
Eisenstein describes the campaign mounted by Thomas Cromwell in the 1530s in support of Henry VIII's break with Rome as the first by any European government to exploit the propaganda potential of the press, citing the historian Geoffrey Elton; Cromwell co-ordinated a coterie of printers and publicists to issue vernacular tracts in defense of royal supremacy, and Parliament was used in parallel to formalize the breach.
On similar lines, the French monarchy used printed bulletins to evoke the patrie as the realm of France and to represent the king as its personification.
Print thus gave early modern states a means of conducting what one source quoted by Eisenstein called a "psychological war" alongside their military and political operations.
The political reach of print provoked sustained efforts at control.
Eisenstein traces a series of pre-Reformation papal and episcopal censorship measures, beginning with the Mainz archbishop's licensing edict of 1485 and culminating in the Leo X decree of 1515 that required all translations to be vetted by bishops or inquisitors.
After the Reformation, the Counter-Reformation papacy went further: the first Papal Index under Paul IV in 1559 forbade lay Catholics to read certain books, and the 1564 Index of Pius IV reiterated the prohibition on vernacular Bibles.
Secular governments introduced licensing systems requiring printers to obtain authorization before issuing new works, and in some jurisdictions banned imported books outright.
These measures had only partial success, since printed material crossed borders easily and clandestine presses operated in many cities; the contest between authorities seeking to regulate the press and those seeking to circulate forbidden material became a recurring feature of European political life for the next three centuries.
Andrew Pettegree argues that print was particularly important in the confessional conflicts of the later sixteenth century, including the French Wars of Religion and the Dutch Revolt: in territories where open Protestant preaching was suppressed, pamphlets, broadsheets and clandestine printing became the main vehicle by which Reformed ideas reached a wider public, and Catholic polemic in turn responded in kind.
Printed literature later played a major role in rallying support, and opposition, during the lead-up to the English Civil War, and later the American and French Revolutions, through newspapers, pamphlets and bulletins.
Quantitative work in economics has tested some of these claims.
Jeremiah Dittmar has shown that cities where printing was established in the fifteenth century grew around 60 percent faster than comparable cities without presses between 1500 and 1600, using distance from Mainz as an instrument for the timing of press adoption.
Jared Rubin, using the same instrument, estimates that cities with at least one press by 1500 were 52 percentage points more likely to have adopted Protestantism by 1530, 42 by 1560, and 29 by 1600; the declining effect suggests that the press mattered most in the early phase of the Reformation, before politics and the wider diffusion of printing took over.
These findings have shaped a wider debate.
In a survey of the literature, Sascha Becker, Steven Pfaff and Jared Rubin distinguish between supply-side accounts of the Reformation, which attribute its spread to institutional or technological factors such as the press, and demand-side accounts, which emphasize the religious, political and economic grievances that drew populations and rulers towards reform.
Subsequent work has refined the picture: Davide Cantoni finds that German princes were much more likely to adopt the Reformation if their immediate neighbors had done so, attributing the apparent effect of distance from Wittenberg to strategic neighborhood interactions rather than print exposure alone.
Becker, Yuan Hsiao, Pfaff and Rubin extend the analysis by reconstructing Luther's personal network from his surviving correspondence, recorded visits, and student enrollments at the University of Wittenberg before 1523.
They report that 36 percent of cities with any documented contact with Luther had adopted the Reformation by 1530, against 6 percent of cities without such contact, and argue that personal ties combined with trade-route diffusion explain the spatial pattern of early adoption more fully than printing alone.
Other studies have looked at university networks, pre-existing religious infrastructure, and competition within local printing markets, with the result that the press is now generally treated as one channel among several rather than the single decisive cause.
Some historians have placed printing in a longer arc of political change.
Benedict Anderson argues that the gradual erosion of three older "axiomatic" cultural conceptions, namely that a sacred script offered privileged access to truth, that society was naturally organized under monarchs ruling by divine dispensation, and that time was indistinguishable from cosmology, was one of the preconditions for the rise of national consciousness in the late eighteenth century.
Print-capitalism, by displacing sacred languages with vernaculars and by accustoming readers to news organized in homogeneous, calendrical time, was for Anderson a central mechanism in this displacement, and contributed to the long decline of the doctrine of the divine right of kings.
Not all contemporaries welcomed these developments.
The Dominican friar Filippo de Strata, writing around 1473, characterized the press as a "whore" (meretrix) compared to the "virgin" pen, and argued that printers valued profit over accuracy and classical scholarship.
The Benedictine abbot Johannes Trithemius, in his 1492 treatise De laude scriptorum manualium, argued that printing would make monks intellectually lazy, that paper books were less durable than parchment manuscripts, and that hand-copying sacred text was a spiritual discipline that mechanical reproduction could not replace.
The Florentine humanist Niccolò Perotti argued in 1470 that many printed books in circulation were badly inaccurate.
Gerolamo Squarzafico claimed in 1481 that most printers were illiterate, and Giorgio Merula voiced concern that printing could damage classical scholarship.
The Swiss physician Paracelsus and his followers urged practitioners to reject inherited textual authority, repeating the Galenic slogan that "the sick should be the doctor's books" and promoting direct observation over book learning.
Eisenstein notes, however, that Paracelsus himself made full use of print to broadcast his views, and that the slogan made better sense in scribal culture, where hand-copied medical illustrations had been prone to degeneration, than in print culture, where repeatable woodblock images allowed observations from nature to be preserved more reliably.
Some critics also feared that religious heterodoxy would spread as biblical texts became accessible to readers without formal training.
The spread of printing also contributed to the decline of Latin as the dominant language of publication.
As works were increasingly issued in the vernacular language of each region, printed texts helped to standardize the spelling and syntax of these languages, reducing their variability.
Febvre and Martin argue that printing exercised a greater influence on the development of national languages than any other single factor, and identify the process as one of several forces contributing to the rise of nationalism in Europe.
The table lists the maximum number of pages which the various press designs could print per hour.
Berthold, Arthur Benedict (1970), American colonial printing as determined by contemporary cultural forces, 1639–1763, New York: B.
Crompton, Samuel Willard (2004), The Printing Press.
Eisenstein, Elizabeth L.
McLuhan, Marshall (1962), The Gutenberg Galaxy: The Making of Typographic Man (1st ed.
Anderson, Benedict (2006) [1983], Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism (revised ed.
Bailyn, Bernard; Hench, John B.
The Press & the American Revolution.
Boston: Northeastern University Press (Originally published: Worcester, Mass.
ISBN 978-0-9303-50307.
Buringh, Eltjo; van Zanden, Jan Luiten (2009), "Charting the "Rise of the West": Manuscripts and Printed Books in Europe, A Long-Term Perspective from the Sixth through Eighteenth Centuries", The Journal of Economic History, 69 (2): 409–445, doi:10.
Cantoni, Davide (2012), "Adopting a New Religion: The Case of Protestantism in 16th Century Germany", The Economic Journal, 122 (560): 502–531, doi:10.
Eisenstein, Elizabeth L.
Tradition und Innovation (in German) (4th ed.
Duchesne, Ricardo (2006), "Asia First?
Hanebutt-Benz, Eva-Maria (2000), "Gutenbergs Erfindungen", Gutenberg.
Aventur und Kunst: Vom Geheimunternehmen zur ersten Medienrevolution (in German), Mainz: Stadt Mainz, pp.
Hellinga, Lotte (2007), "The Gutenberg Revolutions", in Eliot, Simon; Rose, Jonathan (eds.
Issawi, Charles (1980), "Europe, the Middle East and the Shift in Power: Reflections on a Theme by Marshall Hodgson", Comparative Studies in Society and History, 22 (4): 487–504, doi:10.
Kapr, Albert (1996), Johannes Gutenberg.
Koch, Walter (1994), Literaturbericht zur mittelalterlichen und neuzeitlichen Epigraphik (1985–1991), Monumenta Germaniae Historica: Hilfsmittel (in German), vol.
Lehmann-Haupt, Hellmut (1940), "Englische Holzstempelalphabete des XIII.
Lucas, Adam Robert (2005), "Industrial Milling in the Ancient and Medieval Worlds.
A Survey of the Evidence for an Industrial Revolution in Medieval Europe", Technology and Culture, 46 (1): 1–30, doi:10.
Needham, Joseph (1965), Science and Civilisation in China, Physics and Physical Technology, vol.
Onken, Björn (2009), "Presses", in Cancik, Hubert; Schneider, Helmuth (eds.
Pettegree, Andrew (2005), Reformation and the Culture of Persuasion, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, doi:10.
Pollak, Michael (1972), "The Performance of the Wooden Printing Press", The Library Quarterly, 42 (2): 218–264, doi:10.
Rubin, Jared (2014), "Printing and Protestants: An Empirical Test of the Role of Printing in the Reformation", The Review of Economics and Statistics, 96 (2): 270–286, doi:10.
Schneider, Helmuth (2007), "Technology", in Scheidel, Walter; Morris, Ian; Saller, Richard (eds.
Thompson, Susan (1978), "Paper Manufacturing and Early Books", Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 314 (1): 167–176, Bibcode:1978NYASA.
Tsien, Tsuen-Hsuin (1985), Paper and Printing, Science and Civilisation in China, Chemistry and Chemical Technology (Vol.
Weber, Johannes (2006), "Strassburg, 1605: The Origins of the Newspaper in Europe", German History, 24 (3): 387–412, doi:10.
Wolf, Hans-Jürgen (1974), Geschichte der Druckpressen (in German) (1st ed.
A steam engine is a heat engine that performs mechanical work using steam as its working fluid.
The steam engine uses the force produced by steam pressure to push a piston back and forth inside a cylinder.
This pushing force can be transformed by a connecting rod and crank into rotational force for work.
The term “steam engine” is normally applied to reciprocating engines, although some authorities have also referred to the steam turbine and devices such as Hero's aeolipile as “steam engines”.
The essential feature of steam engines is that they are external combustion engines, where the working fluid is separated from the combustion products.
The ideal thermodynamic cycle used to analyze this process is called the Rankine cycle.
In general usage, the term “steam engine” can refer to either complete steam plants (including boilers etc.
Steam-driven devices such as the aeolipile were known in the first century AD, and few other uses were recorded in the 16th century.
In 1606 Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont patented his invention of the first steam-powered water pump for draining mines.
Thomas Savery is considered the inventor of the first commercially used steam powered device, a steam pump that used steam pressure operating directly on the water.
The first commercially successful engine that could transmit continuous power to a machine was developed in 1712 by Thomas Newcomen.
In 1764, James Watt made a critical improvement by removing spent steam to a separate vessel for condensation, greatly improving the amount of work obtained per unit of fuel consumed.
By the 19th century, stationary steam engines powered the factories of the Industrial Revolution.
Steam engines led to the replacement of sailing ships by paddle steamers, and steam locomotives operated on the railways.
Reciprocating piston type steam engines were the dominant source of power until the early 20th century.
The efficiency of stationary steam engines increased dramatically until about 1922.
The highest Rankine Cycle Efficiency of 91% and combined thermal efficiency of 31% was demonstrated and published in 1921 and 1928.
Advances in the design of electric motors and internal combustion engines resulted in the gradual replacement of steam engines in commercial usage.
Steam turbines replaced reciprocating engines in power generation, due to lower cost, higher operating speed, and higher efficiency.
Note that small scale steam turbines are much less efficient than large ones.
As of 2023, large reciprocating piston steam engines are still being manufactured in Germany.
One recorded rudimentary steam-powered engine was the aeolipile described by Hero of Alexandria, a Hellenistic mathematician and engineer in Roman Egypt during the first century AD.
In the following centuries, the few steam-powered engines known were, like the aeolipile, essentially experimental devices used by inventors to demonstrate the properties of steam.
A rudimentary steam turbine device was described by Taqi al-Din in Ottoman Egypt in 1551 and by Giovanni Branca in Italy in 1629.
In 1601, Giambattista della Porta, described an apparatus by which the pressure of steam might be made to raise a column of water.
The Spanish inventor Jerónimo de Ayanz received patents in 1606 for 50 steam-powered inventions, including a water pump for draining inundated mines.
By 1615, Salomon de Caus developed a solar-powered atmospheric engine.
Frenchman Denis Papin did some useful work on the steam digester in 1679, and first used a piston to raise weights in 1690.
The first commercial steam-powered device was a water pump, developed in 1698 by Thomas Savery.
It used condensing steam to create a vacuum which raised water from below and then used steam pressure to raise it higher.
Small engines were effective though larger models were problematic.
They had a very limited lift height and were prone to boiler explosions.
Savery's engine was used in mines, pumping stations and supplying water to water wheels powering textile machinery.
One advantage of Savery's engine was its low cost.
Bento de Moura Portugal introduced an improvement of Savery's construction “to render it capable of working itself”, as described by John Smeaton in the Philosophical Transactions published in 1751.
It continued to be manufactured until the late 18th century.
At least one engine was still known to be operating in 1820.
The first commercially successful engine that could transmit continuous power to a machine was the atmospheric engine (or "fire engine"), invented by Thomas Newcomen around 1712.
It improved on Savery's steam pump, using a piston as proposed by Papin.
Newcomen's engine was relatively inefficient, and mostly used for pumping water.
It worked by creating a partial vacuum by condensing steam under a piston within a cylinder.
It was employed for draining mine workings at depths originally impractical using traditional means, and for providing reusable water for driving waterwheels at factories sited away from a suitable “head”.
Water that passed over the wheel was pumped up into a storage reservoir above the wheel.
In 1780 James Pickard patented the use of a flywheel and crankshaft to provide rotative motion from an improved Newcomen engine.
In 1720, Jacob Leupold described a two-cylinder high-pressure steam engine.
The invention was published in his major work "Theatri Machinarum Hydraulicarum".
The engine used two heavy pistons to provide motion to a water pump.
Each piston was raised by the steam pressure and returned to its original position by gravity.
The two pistons shared a common four-way rotary valve connected directly to a steam boiler.
The next major step occurred when James Watt developed (1763–1775) an improved version of Newcomen's engine, with a separate condenser.
Boulton and Watt's early engines used half as much coal as John Smeaton's improved version of Newcomen's.
Newcomen's and Watt's early engines were "atmospheric".
They were powered by air pressure pushing a piston into the partial vacuum generated by condensing steam, instead of the pressure of expanding steam.
The engine [cylinders had to be large because the only usable force acting on them was atmospheric pressure.
Watt developed his engine further, modifying it to provide a rotary motion suitable for driving machinery.
This enabled factories to be sited away from rivers, and accelerated the pace of the Industrial Revolution.
The meaning of high pressure, together with an actual value above ambient, depends on the era in which the term was used.
For early use of the term Van Reimsdijk refers to steam being at a sufficiently high pressure that it could be exhausted to atmosphere without reliance on a vacuum to enable it to perform useful work.
Ewing states that Watt's condensing engines were known, at the time, as low pressure compared to high pressure, non-condensing engines of the same period.
Watt's patent prevented others from making high pressure and compound engines.
Shortly after Watt's patent expired in 1800, Richard Trevithick and, separately, Oliver Evans in 1801 introduced engines using high-pressure steam; Trevithick obtained his high-pressure engine patent in 1802, and Evans had made several working models before then.
These were much more powerful for a given cylinder size than previous engines and could be made small enough for transport applications.
Thereafter, technological developments and improvements in manufacturing techniques (partly brought about by the adoption of the steam engine as a power source) resulted in the design of more efficient engines that could be smaller, faster, or more powerful, depending on the intended application.
The Cornish engine was developed by Trevithick and others in the 1810s.
It was a compound cycle engine that used high-pressure steam expansively, then condensed the low-pressure steam, making it relatively efficient.
The Cornish engine had irregular motion and torque through the cycle, limiting it mainly to pumping.
Cornish engines were used in mines and for water supply until the late 19th century.
Early builders of stationary steam engines considered that horizontal cylinders would be subject to excessive wear.
Their engines were therefore arranged with the piston axis in vertical position.
In time the horizontal arrangement became more popular, allowing compact, but powerful engines to be fitted in smaller spaces.
The acme of the horizontal engine was the Corliss steam engine, patented in 1849, which was a four-valve counter flow engine with separate steam admission and exhaust valves and automatic variable steam cutoff.
When Corliss was given the Rumford Medal, the committee said that "no one invention since Watt's time has so enhanced the efficiency of the steam engine".
In addition to using 30% less steam, it provided more uniform speed due to variable steam cut off, making it well suited to manufacturing, especially cotton spinning.
The first experimental road-going steam-powered vehicles were built in the late 18th century, but it was not until after Richard Trevithick had developed the use of high-pressure steam, around 1800, that mobile steam engines became a practical proposition.
The first half of the 19th century saw great progress in steam vehicle design, and by the 1850s it was becoming viable to produce them on a commercial basis.
This progress was dampened by legislation which limited or prohibited the use of steam-powered vehicles on roads.
Improvements in vehicle technology continued from the 1860s to the 1920s.
Steam road vehicles were used for many applications.
In the 20th century, the rapid development of internal combustion engine technology led to the demise of the steam engine as a source of propulsion of vehicles on a commercial basis, with relatively few remaining in use beyond the Second World War.
Many of these vehicles were acquired by enthusiasts for preservation, and numerous examples are still in existence.
In the 1960s, the air pollution problems in California gave rise to a brief period of interest in developing and studying steam-powered vehicles as a possible means of reducing the pollution.
Apart from interest by steam enthusiasts, the occasional replica vehicle, and experimental technology, no steam vehicles are in production at present.
Near the end of the 19th century, compound engines came into widespread use.
Compound engines exhausted steam into successively larger cylinders to accommodate the higher volumes at reduced pressures, giving improved efficiency.
These stages were called expansions, with double- and triple-expansion engines being common, especially in shipping where efficiency was important to reduce the weight of coal carried.
Steam engines remained the dominant source of power until the early 20th century, when advances in the design of the steam turbine, electric motors, and internal combustion engines gradually resulted in the replacement of reciprocating (piston) steam engines, with merchant shipping relying increasingly upon diesel engines, and warships on the steam turbine.
As the development of steam engines progressed through the 18th century, various attempts were made to apply them to road and railway use.
In 1784, William Murdoch, a Scottish inventor, built a model steam road locomotive.
An early working model of a steam rail locomotive was designed and constructed by steamboat pioneer John Fitch in the United States probably during the 1780s or 1790s.
His steam locomotive used interior bladed wheels guided by rails or tracks.
The first full-scale working railway steam locomotive was built by Richard Trevithick in the United Kingdom and, on 21 February 1804, the world's first railway journey took place as Trevithick's steam locomotive hauled 10 tonnes of iron, 70 passengers and five wagons along the tramway from the Pen-y-darren ironworks, near Merthyr Tydfil to Abercynon in south Wales.
The design incorporated a number of important innovations that included using high-pressure steam which reduced the weight of the engine and increased its efficiency.
Trevithick visited the Newcastle area later in 1804 and the colliery railways in north-east England became the leading centre for experimentation and development of steam locomotives.
Trevithick continued his own experiments using a trio of locomotives, concluding with the Catch Me Who Can in 1808.
Only four years later, the successful twin-cylinder locomotive Salamanca by Matthew Murray was used by the edge railed rack and pinion Middleton Railway.
In 1825 George Stephenson built the Locomotion for the Stockton and Darlington Railway.
This was the first public steam railway in the world and then in 1829, he built The Rocket which was entered in and won the Rainhill Trials.
The Liverpool and Manchester Railway opened in 1830 making exclusive use of steam power for both passenger and freight trains.
Steam locomotives continued to be manufactured until the late twentieth century in places such as China and the former East Germany (where the DR Class 52.
The final major evolution of the steam engine design was the use of steam turbines starting in the late part of the 19th century.
Steam turbines are generally more efficient than reciprocating piston type steam engines (for outputs above several hundred horsepower), have fewer moving parts, and provide rotary power directly instead of through a connecting rod system or similar means.
Steam turbines virtually replaced reciprocating engines in electricity generating stations early in the 20th century, where their efficiency, higher speed appropriate to generator service, and smooth rotation were advantages.
Today most electric power is provided by steam turbines.
In the United States, 90% of the electric power is produced in this way using a variety of heat sources.
Steam turbines were extensively applied for propulsion of large ships throughout most of the 20th century.
Although the reciprocating steam engine is no longer in widespread commercial use, various companies are exploring or exploiting the potential of the engine as an alternative to internal combustion engines.
The world's smallest working "steam engine" was revealed in 2011.
The micro-scale engine was developed by two German scientists at the University of Stuttgart.
It operates on the principle of a Stirling engine.
There are two fundamental components of a steam plant: the boiler or steam generator, and the "motor unit", referred to itself as a "steam engine".
Stationary steam engines in fixed buildings may have the boiler and engine in separate buildings some distance apart.
For portable or mobile use, such as steam locomotives, the two are mounted together.
The widely used reciprocating engine typically consisted of a cast-iron cylinder, piston, connecting rod and beam or a crank and flywheel, and miscellaneous linkages.
Steam was alternately supplied and exhausted by one or more valves.
Speed control was either automatic, using a governor, or by a manual valve.
The cylinder casting contained steam supply and exhaust ports.
Engines equipped with a condenser are a separate type than those that exhaust to the atmosphere.
Other components are often present; pumps (such as an injector) to supply water to the boiler during operation, condensers to recirculate the water and recover the latent heat of vaporisation, and superheaters to raise the temperature of the steam above its saturated vapour point, and various mechanisms to increase the draft for fireboxes.
When coal is used, a chain or screw stoking mechanism and its drive engine or motor may be included to move the fuel from a supply bin (bunker) to the firebox.
The heat required for boiling the water and raising the temperature of the steam can be derived from various sources, most commonly from burning combustible materials with an appropriate supply of air in a closed space (e.
In the case of model or toy steam engines and a few full scale cases, the heat source can be an electric heating element.
Boilers are pressure vessels that contain water to be boiled, and features that transfer the heat to the water as effectively as possible.
Water is passed through tubes surrounded by hot gas.
Hot gas is passed through tubes immersed in water, the same water also circulates in a water jacket surrounding the firebox and, in high-output locomotive boilers, also passes through tubes in the firebox itself (thermic syphons and security circulators).
Fire-tube boilers were the main type used for early high-pressure steam (typical steam locomotive practice), but they were to a large extent displaced by more economical water tube boilers in the late 19th century for marine propulsion and large stationary applications.
Many boilers raise the temperature of the steam after it has left that part of the boiler where it is in contact with the water.
Known as superheating, it turns wet steam into superheated steam.
It avoids the steam condensing in the engine cylinders, and gives a significantly higher efficiency.
In a steam engine, a piston or steam turbine or any other similar device for doing mechanical work takes a supply of steam at high pressure and temperature and gives out a supply of steam at lower pressure and temperature, using as much of the difference in steam energy as possible to do mechanical work.
These "motor units" are often called 'steam engines' in their own right.
Engines using compressed air or other gases differ from steam engines only in details that depend on the nature of the gas although compressed air has been used in steam engines without change.
As with all heat engines, the majority of primary energy must be emitted as waste heat at relatively low temperature.
The simplest cold sink is to vent the steam to the environment.
This is often used on steam locomotives to avoid the weight and bulk of condensers.
Some of the released steam is vented up the chimney so as to increase the draw on the fire, which greatly increases engine power, but reduces efficiency.
Sometimes the waste heat from the engine is useful itself, and in those cases, very high overall efficiency can be obtained.
Steam engines in stationary power plants use surface condensers as a cold sink.
The condensers are cooled by water flow from oceans, rivers, lakes, and often by cooling towers which evaporate water to provide cooling energy removal.
The resulting condensed hot water (condensate), is then pumped back up to pressure and sent back to the boiler.
A dry-type cooling tower is similar to an automobile radiator and is used in locations where water is costly.
Waste heat can also be ejected by evaporative (wet) cooling towers, which use a secondary external water circuit that evaporates some of flow to the air.
River boats initially used a jet condenser in which cold water from the river is injected into the exhaust steam from the engine.
Cooling water and condensate mix.
While this was also applied for sea-going vessels, generally after only a few days of operation the boiler would become coated with deposited salt, reducing performance and increasing the risk of a boiler explosion.
Starting about 1834, the use of surface condensers on ships eliminated fouling of the boilers, and improved engine efficiency.
Evaporated water cannot be used for subsequent purposes (other than rain somewhere), whereas river water can be re-used.
In all cases, the steam plant boiler feed water, which must be kept pure, is kept separate from the cooling water or air.
Most steam boilers have a means to supply water whilst at pressure, so that they may be run continuously.
Utility and industrial boilers commonly use multi-stage centrifugal pumps; however, other types are used.
Another means of supplying lower-pressure (typically about 5 to 10 atm (73 to 147 psi)) boiler feed water is an injector, which uses a steam jet usually supplied from the boiler.
Injectors became popular in the 1850s but are no longer widely used, except in applications such as steam locomotives.
It is the pressurization of the water that circulates through the steam boiler that allows the water to be raised to temperatures well above 100 °C (212 °F) boiling point of water at one atmospheric pressure, and by that means to increase the efficiency of the steam cycle.
For safety reasons, nearly all steam engines are equipped with mechanisms to monitor the boiler, such as a pressure gauge and a sight glass to monitor the water level.
Many engines, stationary and mobile, are also fitted with a governor to regulate the speed of the engine without the need for human interference.
The most useful instrument for analyzing the performance of steam engines is the steam engine indicator.
Early versions were in use by 1851, but the most successful indicator was developed for the high speed engine inventor and manufacturer Charles Porter by Charles Richard and exhibited at London Exhibition in 1862.
The steam engine indicator traces on paper the pressure in the cylinder throughout the cycle, which can be used to spot various problems and calculate developed horsepower.
It was routinely used by engineers, mechanics and insurance inspectors.
The engine indicator can also be used on internal combustion engines.
See image of indicator diagram below (in Types of motor units section).
The centrifugal governor was adopted by James Watt for use on a steam engine in 1788 after Watt's partner Boulton saw one on the equipment of a flour mill Boulton & Watt were building.
The governor could not actually hold a set speed, because it would assume a new constant speed in response to load changes.
The governor was able to handle smaller variations such as those caused by fluctuating heat load to the boiler.
Also, there was a tendency for oscillation whenever there was a speed change.
As a consequence, engines equipped only with this governor were not suitable for operations requiring constant speed, such as cotton spinning.
The governor was improved over time and coupled with variable steam cut off, good speed control in response to changes in load was attainable near the end of the 19th century.
In a simple engine, or "single expansion engine", the charge of steam passes through the entire expansion process in an individual cylinder.
A simple engine may have one or more individual cylinders.
It is then exhausted directly into the atmosphere or into a condenser.
As steam expands in passing through a high-pressure engine, its temperature drops because no heat is being added to the system; this is known as adiabatic expansion and results in steam entering the cylinder at high temperature and leaving at lower temperature.
This causes a cycle of heating and cooling of the cylinder with every stroke, which is a source of inefficiency.
The dominant efficiency loss in reciprocating steam engines is cylinder condensation and re-evaporation.
The steam cylinder and adjacent metal parts/ports operate at a temperature about halfway between the steam admission saturation temperature and the saturation temperature corresponding to the exhaust pressure.
As high-pressure steam is admitted into the working cylinder, much of the high-temperature steam is condensed as water droplets onto the metal surfaces, significantly reducing the steam available for expansive work.
When the expanding steam reaches low pressure (especially during the exhaust stroke), the previously deposited water droplets that had just been formed within the cylinder/ports now boil away (re-evaporation) and this steam does no further work in the cylinder.
There are practical limits on the expansion ratio of a steam engine cylinder, as increasing cylinder surface area tends to exacerbate the cylinder condensation and re-evaporation issues.
This negates the theoretical advantages associated with a high ratio of expansion in an individual cylinder.
A method to lessen the magnitude of energy loss to a very long cylinder was invented in 1804 by British engineer Arthur Woolf, who patented his Woolf high-pressure compound engine in 1805.
In the compound engine, high-pressure steam from the boiler expands in a high-pressure (HP) cylinder and then enters one or more subsequent lower-pressure (LP) cylinders.
The complete expansion of the steam now occurs across multiple cylinders, with the overall temperature drop within each cylinder reduced considerably.
By expanding the steam in steps with smaller temperature range (within each cylinder) the condensation and re-evaporation efficiency issue (described above) is reduced.
This reduces the magnitude of cylinder heating and cooling, increasing the efficiency of the engine.
By staging the expansion in multiple cylinders, variations of torque can be reduced.
To derive equal work from lower-pressure cylinder requires a larger cylinder volume as this steam occupies a greater volume.
Therefore, the bore, and in rare cases the stroke, are increased in low-pressure cylinders, resulting in larger cylinders.
Double-expansion (usually known as compound) engines expanded the steam in two stages.
The pairs may be duplicated or the work of the large low-pressure cylinder can be split with one high-pressure cylinder exhausting into two low pressure cylinders, giving a three-cylinder layout where cylinder and piston diameter are about the same, making the reciprocating masses easier to balance.
Cross compounds: Also known as 'receiver' compounds.
Cylinders out of phase (< 180°), requiring the use of an exhaust 'receiver', which is usually no more than the valve chest or casing itself.
Woolf compounds: The cylinders are in phase or 180° phase shifted.
Tandem compounds: A form of Woolf compound.
Angle compounds: A form of Cross compound.
The cylinders are arranged in a V (usually at a 90° angle) and drive a common crank.
With two-cylinder compounds used in railway work, the pistons are connected to the cranks as with a two-cylinder simple at 90° out of phase with each other (quartered).
When the double-expansion group is duplicated, producing a four-cylinder compound, the individual pistons within the group are usually balanced at 180°, the groups being set at 90° to each other.
In one case (the first type of Vauclain compound), the pistons worked in the same phase driving a common crosshead and crank, again set at 90° as for a two-cylinder engine.
With the three-cylinder compound arrangement, the LP cranks were either set at 90° with the HP one at 135° to the other two, or in some cases, all three cranks were set at 120°.
The adoption of compounding was common for industrial units, for road engines and almost universal for marine engines after 1880; it was not universally popular in railway locomotives where it was often perceived as complicated.
This is partly due to the harsh railway operating environment and limited space afforded by the loading gauge (particularly in Britain, where compounding was never common and not employed after 1930).
However, although never in the majority, it was popular in many other countries.
It is a logical extension of the compound engine (described above) to split the expansion into yet more stages to increase efficiency.
The result is the multiple-expansion engine.
Such engines use either three or four expansion stages and are known as triple- and quadruple-expansion engines respectively.
These engines use a series of cylinders of progressively increasing diameter.
These cylinders are designed to divide the work into equal shares for each expansion stage.
As with the double-expansion engine, if space is at a premium, then two smaller cylinders may be used for the low-pressure stage.
Multiple-expansion engines typically had the cylinders arranged inline, but various other formations were used.
In the late 19th century, the Yarrow-Schlick-Tweedy balancing "system" was used on some marine triple-expansion engines.
Y-S-T engines divided the low-pressure expansion stages between two cylinders, one at each end of the engine.
This allowed the crankshaft to be better balanced, resulting in a smoother, faster-responding engine which ran with less vibration.
This made the four-cylinder triple-expansion engine popular with large passenger liners (such as the Olympic class), but this was ultimately replaced by the virtually vibration-free turbine engine.
It is noted, however, that triple-expansion reciprocating steam engines were used to drive the World War II Liberty ships, by far the largest number of identical ships ever built.
Over 2700 ships were built, in the United States, from a British original design.
The image in this section shows an animation of a triple-expansion engine.
The steam travels through the engine from left to right.
The valve chest for each of the cylinders is to the left of the corresponding cylinder.
Land-based steam engines could exhaust their steam to atmosphere, as feed water was usually readily available.
Prior to and during World War I, the expansion engine dominated marine applications, where high vessel speed was not essential.
It was, however, superseded by the British invention steam turbine where speed was required, for instance in warships, such as the dreadnought battleships, and ocean liners.
HMS Dreadnought of 1905 was the first major warship to replace the proven technology of the reciprocating engine with the then-novel steam turbine.
In most reciprocating piston engines, the steam reverses its direction of flow at each stroke (counterflow), entering and exhausting from the same end of the cylinder.
The complete engine cycle occupies one rotation of the crank and two piston strokes; the cycle also comprises four events – admission, expansion, exhaust, compression.
These events are controlled by valves often working inside a steam chest adjacent to the cylinder; the valves distribute the steam by opening and closing steam ports communicating with the cylinder end(s) and are driven by valve gear, of which there are many types.
The simplest valve gears give events of fixed length during the engine cycle and often make the engine rotate in only one direction.
Many however have a reversing mechanism which additionally can provide means for saving steam as speed and momentum are gained by gradually "shortening the cutoff" or rather, shortening the admission event; this in turn proportionately lengthens the expansion period.
However, as one and the same valve usually controls both steam flows, a short cutoff at admission adversely affects the exhaust and compression periods which should ideally always be kept fairly constant; if the exhaust event is too brief, the totality of the exhaust steam cannot evacuate the cylinder, choking it and giving excessive compression ("kick back").
In the 1840s and 1850s, there were attempts to overcome this problem by means of various patent valve gears with a separate, variable cutoff expansion valve riding on the back of the main slide valve; the latter usually had fixed or limited cutoff.
The combined setup gave a fair approximation of the ideal events, at the expense of increased friction and wear, and the mechanism tended to be complicated.
The usual compromise solution has been to provide lap by lengthening rubbing surfaces of the valve in such a way as to overlap the port on the admission side, with the effect that the exhaust side remains open for a longer period after cut-off on the admission side has occurred.
This expedient has since been generally considered satisfactory for most purposes and makes possible the use of the simpler Stephenson, Joy, and Walschaerts motions.
Corliss, and later, poppet valve gears had separate admission and exhaust valves driven by trip mechanisms or cams profiled so as to give ideal events; most of these gears never succeeded outside of the stationary marketplace due to various other issues including leakage and more delicate mechanisms.
Before the exhaust phase is quite complete, the exhaust side of the valve closes, shutting a portion of the exhaust steam inside the cylinder.
This determines the compression phase where a cushion of steam is formed against which the piston does work whilst its velocity is rapidly decreasing; it moreover obviates the pressure and temperature shock, which would otherwise be caused by the sudden admission of the high-pressure steam at the beginning of the following cycle.
The above effects are further enhanced by providing lead: as was later discovered with the internal combustion engine, it has been found advantageous since the late 1830s to advance the admission phase, giving the valve lead so that admission occurs a little before the end of the exhaust stroke in order to fill the clearance volume comprising the ports and the cylinder ends (not part of the piston-swept volume) before the steam begins to exert effort on the piston.
Uniflow engines attempt to remedy the difficulties arising from the usual counterflow cycle where, during each stroke, the port and the cylinder walls will be cooled by the passing exhaust steam, whilst the hotter incoming admission steam will waste some of its energy in restoring the working temperature.
The aim of the uniflow is to remedy this defect and improve efficiency by providing an additional port uncovered by the piston at the end of each stroke making the steam flow only in one direction.
By this means, the simple-expansion uniflow engine gives efficiency equivalent to that of classic compound systems with the added advantage of superior part-load performance, and comparable efficiency to turbines for smaller engines below one thousand horsepower.
However, the thermal expansion gradient uniflow engines produce along the cylinder wall gives practical difficulties.
A steam turbine consists of one or more rotors (rotating discs) mounted on a drive shaft, alternating with a series of stators (static discs) fixed to the turbine casing.
The rotors have a propeller-like arrangement of blades at the outer edge.
Steam acts upon these blades, producing rotary motion.
The stator consists of a similar, but fixed, series of blades that serve to redirect the steam flow onto the next rotor stage.
A steam turbine often exhausts into a surface condenser that provides a vacuum.
The stages of a steam turbine are typically arranged to extract the maximum potential work from a specific velocity and pressure of steam, giving rise to a series of variably sized high- and low-pressure stages.
Turbines are only efficient if they rotate at relatively high speed, therefore they are usually connected to reduction gearing to drive lower speed applications, such as a ship's propeller.
In the vast majority of large electric generating stations, turbines are directly connected to generators with no reduction gearing.
Typical speeds are 3600 revolutions per minute (RPM) in the United States with 60 Hertz power, and 3000 RPM in Europe and other countries with 50 Hertz electric power systems.
In nuclear power applications, due to enormous size, the turbines typically run at half these speeds, 1800 RPM and 1500 RPM.
A turbine rotor is also only capable of providing power when rotating in one direction.
Therefore, a reversing stage or gearbox is usually required where power is required in the opposite direction.
Steam turbines provide direct rotational force and therefore do not require a linkage mechanism to convert reciprocating to rotary motion.
Thus, they produce smoother rotational forces on the output shaft.
This contributes to a lower maintenance requirement and less wear on the machinery they power than a comparable reciprocating engine.
The main use for steam turbines is in electricity generation (in the 1990s about 90% of the world's electric production was by use of steam turbines) however the recent widespread application of large gas turbine units and typical combined cycle power plants has resulted in reduction of this percentage to the 80% regime for steam turbines.
In electricity production, the high speed of turbine rotation matches well with the speed of modern electric generators, which are typically direct connected to their driving turbines.
In marine service, (pioneered on the Turbinia), steam turbines with reduction gearing (although the Turbinia has direct turbines to propellers with no reduction gearbox) dominated large ship propulsion throughout the late 20th century, being more efficient (and requiring far less maintenance) than reciprocating steam engines.
In recent decades, reciprocating Diesel engines, and gas turbines, have almost entirely supplanted steam propulsion for marine applications.
Virtually all nuclear power plants generate electricity by heating water to provide steam that drives a turbine connected to an electrical generator.
Nuclear-powered ships and submarines either use a steam turbine directly for main propulsion, with generators providing auxiliary power, or else employ turbo-electric transmission, where the steam drives a turbo generator set with propulsion provided by electric motors.
A limited number of steam turbine railroad locomotives were manufactured.
Some non-condensing direct-drive locomotives did meet with some success for long haul freight operations in Sweden and for express passenger work in Britain, but were not repeated.
Elsewhere, notably in the United States, more advanced designs with electric transmission were built experimentally, but not reproduced.
It was found that steam turbines were not ideally suited to the railroad environment and these locomotives failed to oust the classic reciprocating steam unit in the way that modern diesel and electric traction has done.
An oscillating cylinder steam engine is a variant of the simple expansion steam engine which does not require valves to direct steam into and out of the cylinder.
Instead of valves, the entire cylinder rocks, or oscillates, such that one or more holes in the cylinder line up with holes in a fixed port face or in the pivot mounting (trunnion).
These engines are mainly used in toys and models because of their simplicity, but have also been used in full-size working engines, mainly on ships where their compactness is valued.
It is possible to use a mechanism based on a pistonless rotary engine such as the Wankel engine in place of the cylinders and valve gear of a conventional reciprocating steam engine.
Many such engines have been designed, from the time of James Watt to the present day, but relatively few were actually built and even fewer went into quantity production; see link at bottom of article for more details.
The major problem is the difficulty of sealing the rotors to make them steam-tight in the face of wear and thermal expansion; the resulting leakage made them very inefficient.
Lack of expansive working, or any means of control of the cutoff, is also a serious problem with many such designs.
By the 1840s, it was clear that the concept had inherent problems and rotary engines were treated with some derision in the technical press.
However, the arrival of electricity on the scene, and the obvious advantages of driving a dynamo directly from a high-speed engine, led to something of a revival in interest in the 1880s and 1890s, and a few designs had some limited success.
Of the few designs that were manufactured in quantity, those of the Hult Brothers Rotary Steam Engine Company of Stockholm, Sweden, and the spherical engine of Beauchamp Tower are notable.
Tower's engines were used by the Great Eastern Railway to drive lighting dynamos on their locomotives, and by the Admiralty for driving dynamos on board the ships of the Royal Navy.
They were eventually replaced in these niche applications by steam turbines.
The aeolipile represents the use of steam by the rocket-reaction principle, although not for direct propulsion.
In more modern times there has been limited use of steam for rocketry – particularly for rocket cars.
Steam rocketry works by filling a pressure vessel with hot water at high pressure and opening a valve leading to a suitable nozzle.
The drop in pressure immediately boils some of the water and the steam leaves through a nozzle, creating a propulsive force.
Ferdinand Verbiest's carriage was powered by an aeolipile in 1679.
Steam engines possess boilers and other components that are pressure vessels that contain a great deal of potential energy.
Steam escapes and boiler explosions (typically BLEVEs) can and have in the past caused great loss of life.
While variations in standards may exist in different countries, stringent legal, testing, training, care with manufacture, operation and certification is applied to ensure safety.
Steam engines frequently possess two independent mechanisms for ensuring that the pressure in the boiler does not go too high; one may be adjusted by the user, the second is typically designed as an ultimate fail-safe.
Such safety valves traditionally used a simple lever to restrain a plug valve in the top of a boiler.
One end of the lever carried a weight or spring that restrained the valve against steam pressure.
Early valves could be adjusted by engine drivers, leading to many accidents when a driver fastened the valve down to allow greater steam pressure and more power from the engine.
The more recent type of safety valve uses an adjustable spring-loaded valve, which is locked such that operators may not tamper with its adjustment unless a seal is illegally broken.
This arrangement is considerably safer.
Lead fusible plugs may be present in the crown of the boiler's firebox.
If the water level drops, such that the temperature of the firebox crown increases significantly, the lead melts and the steam escapes, warning the operators, who may then manually suppress the fire.
Except in the smallest of boilers the steam escape has little effect on dampening the fire.
The plugs are also too small in area to lower steam pressure significantly, depressurizing the boiler.
If they were any larger, the volume of escaping steam would itself endanger the crew.
The Rankine cycle is the fundamental thermodynamic underpinning of the steam engine.
The cycle is an arrangement of components as is typically used for simple power production, and uses the phase change of water (boiling water producing steam, condensing exhaust steam, producing liquid water) to provide a practical heat/power conversion system.
The heat is supplied externally to a closed loop with some of the heat added being converted to work and the waste heat being removed in a condenser.
The Rankine cycle is used in virtually all steam power production applications.
In the 1990s, Rankine steam cycles generated about 90% of all electric power used throughout the world, including virtually all solar, biomass, coal, and nuclear power plants.
It is named after William John Macquorn Rankine, a Scottish polymath.
The Rankine cycle is sometimes referred to as a practical Carnot cycle because, when an efficient turbine is used, the TS diagram begins to resemble the Carnot cycle.
The main difference is that heat addition (in the boiler) and rejection (in the condenser) are isobaric (constant pressure) processes in the Rankine cycle and isothermal (constant temperature) processes in the theoretical Carnot cycle.
In this cycle, a pump is used to pressurize the working fluid which is received from the condenser as a liquid not as a gas.
Pumping the working fluid in liquid form during the cycle requires a small fraction of the energy to transport it compared to the energy needed to compress the working fluid in gaseous form in a compressor (as in the Carnot cycle).
The cycle of a reciprocating steam engine differs from that of turbines because of condensation and re-evaporation occurring in the cylinder or in the steam inlet passages.
The working fluid in a Rankine cycle can operate as a closed loop system, where the working fluid is recycled continuously, or may be an "open loop" system, where the exhaust steam is directly released to the atmosphere, and a separate source of water feeding the boiler is supplied.
Normally water is the fluid of choice due to its favourable properties, such as non-toxic and unreactive chemistry, abundance, low cost, and its thermodynamic properties.
Mercury is the working fluid in the mercury vapor turbine.
Low boiling hydrocarbons can be used in a binary cycle.
The steam engine contributed much to the development of thermodynamic theory; however, the only applications of scientific theory that influenced the steam engine were the original concepts of harnessing the power of steam and atmospheric pressure and knowledge of properties of heat and steam.
The experimental measurements made by Watt on a model steam engine led to the development of the separate condenser.
Watt independently discovered latent heat, which was confirmed by the original discoverer Joseph Black, who also advised Watt on experimental procedures.
Watt was also aware of the change in the boiling point of water with pressure.
Otherwise, the improvements to the engine itself were more mechanical in nature.
The thermodynamic concepts of the Rankine cycle did give engineers the understanding needed to calculate efficiency which aided the development of modern high-pressure and -temperature boilers and the steam turbine.
The efficiency of an engine cycle can be calculated by dividing the energy output of mechanical work that the engine produces by the energy put into the engine.
The historical measure of a steam engine's energy efficiency was its "duty".
The concept of duty was first introduced by Watt in order to illustrate how much more efficient his engines were over the earlier Newcomen designs.
Duty is the number of foot-pounds of work delivered by burning one bushel (94 lb (43 kg)) of coal.
The best examples of Newcomen designs had a duty of about 7 million, but most were closer to 5 million.
Watt's original low-pressure designs were able to deliver duty as high as 25 million, but averaged about 17.
This was a three-fold improvement over the average Newcomen design.
Early Watt engines equipped with high-pressure steam improved this to 65 million.
The Carnot cycle, a theoretical ideal thermodynamic cycle, sets the limit of a steam engine's efficiency.
Carnot cycle describes a system of two thermal reservoirs with heat transferred between them.
In a steam engine part of the heat transferred is converted into mechanical work.
The greater the difference in temperature between the two reservoirs, the more efficient the engine.
One way of increasing the difference is by using superheated steam.
The efficiency of a Rankine cycle is usually limited by the working fluid.
Without the pressure reaching supercritical levels for the working fluid, the temperature range over which the cycle can operate is small; in steam turbines, turbine entry temperatures are typically 565 °C (1,049 °F; 838 K) (the creep limit of stainless steel) and condenser temperatures are around 30 °C (86 °F; 303 K).
This gives a theoretical Carnot efficiency of about 64% compared with an actual efficiency of 42% for a modern coal-fired power station.
This low turbine entry temperature (compared with a gas turbine) is why the Rankine cycle is often used as a bottoming cycle in combined-cycle gas turbine power stations.
One principal advantage the Rankine cycle holds over others is that during the compression stage relatively little work is required to drive the pump, the working fluid being in its liquid phase at this point.
By condensing the fluid, the work required by the pump consumes only 1% to 3% of the turbine (or reciprocating engine) power and contributes to a much higher efficiency for a real cycle.
The benefit of this is lost somewhat due to the lower heat addition temperature.
Gas turbines, for instance, have turbine entry temperatures approaching 1,500 °C (2,730 °F; 1,770 K).
Nonetheless, the efficiencies of actual large steam cycles and large modern simple cycle gas turbines are fairly well matched.
In practice, a reciprocating steam engine cycle exhausting the steam to atmosphere will typically have an efficiency (including the boiler) in the range of 1–10%.
However, with the addition of a condenser, Corliss valves, multiple expansion, and high steam pressure/temperature, it may be greatly improved.
Historically into the range of 10–20%, and very rarely slightly higher.
A modern, large electrical power station (producing several hundred megawatts of electrical output) with steam reheat, economizer etc.
It is also possible to capture the waste heat using cogeneration in which the waste heat is used for heating a lower boiling point working fluid or as a heat source for district heating via saturated low-pressure steam.
Electricity is the set of physical phenomena associated with the presence and motion of matter possessing an electric charge.
Electricity is related to magnetism, both being part of the phenomenon of electromagnetism, as described by Maxwell's equations.
Common phenomena are related to electricity, including lightning, static electricity, electric heating, electric discharges and many others.
The presence of either a positive or negative electric charge produces an electric field.
The motion of electric charge carriers is an electric current and produces a magnetic field.
In most applications, Coulomb's law determines the force acting on an electrically charged particle.
Electric potential is the work done to move an electric charge from one position to another within an electric field, typically measured in volts.
Electricity plays a central role in many modern technologies, serving in electric power where electric current is used to energise equipment, and in electronics dealing with electrical circuits involving active components such as vacuum tubes, transistors, diodes and integrated circuits, and associated passive interconnection technologies.
The study of electrical phenomena dates back to antiquity, with theoretical understanding progressing slowly until the 17th and 18th centuries.
The development of the theory of electromagnetism in the 19th century marked significant progress, leading to electricity's industrial and residential application by electrical engineers by the century's end.
This rapid expansion in electrical technology at the time was the driving force behind the Second Industrial Revolution, with electricity's versatility driving transformations in both industry and society.
Electricity is integral to applications spanning transport, heating/cooling, lighting, communications, and computation, making it the foundation of modern industrial society.
Long before any knowledge of electricity existed, people were aware of shocks from electric fish.
Ancient Egyptian texts dating from 2750 BCE described them as the "protectors" of all other fish.
Electric fish were again reported millennia later by ancient Greek, Roman and Arab naturalists and physicians.
Several ancient writers, such as Pliny the Elder and Scribonius Largus, attested to the numbing effect of electric shocks delivered by electric catfish and electric rays, and knew that such shocks could travel along conducting objects.
Patients with ailments such as gout or headache were directed to touch electric fish in the hope that the powerful jolt might cure them.
Ancient cultures around the Mediterranean knew that certain objects, such as rods of amber, could be rubbed with cat's fur to attract light objects like feathers.
Thales of Miletus made a series of observations on static electricity around 600 BCE, from which he believed that friction rendered amber magnetic, in contrast to minerals such as magnetite, which needed no rubbing.
Thales was incorrect in believing the attraction was due to a magnetic effect, but later science would prove a link between magnetism and electricity.
Electricity would remain little more than an intellectual curiosity for millennia until 1600, when the English scientist William Gilbert wrote De Magnete, in which he made a careful study of electricity and magnetism, distinguishing the lodestone effect from static electricity produced by rubbing amber.
He coined the Neo-Latin word electricus ("of amber" or "like amber", from ἤλεκτρον, elektron, the Greek word for "amber") to refer to the property of attracting small objects after being rubbed.
This association gave rise to the English words "electric" and "electricity", which made their first appearance in print in Thomas Browne's Pseudodoxia Epidemica of 1646.
Isaac Newton made early investigations into electricity, with an idea of his written down in his book Opticks arguably the beginning of the field theory of the electric force.
Further work was conducted in the 17th and early 18th centuries by Otto von Guericke, Robert Boyle, Stephen Gray and C.
Later in the 18th century, Benjamin Franklin conducted extensive research in electricity, selling his possessions to fund his work.
In June 1752 he is reputed to have attached a metal key to the bottom of a dampened kite string and flown the kite in a storm-threatened sky.
A succession of sparks jumping from the key to the back of his hand showed that lightning was indeed electrical in nature.
He also explained the apparently paradoxical behaviour of the Leyden jar as a device for storing large amounts of electrical charge in terms of electricity consisting of both positive and negative charges.
In 1775, Hugh Williamson reported a series of experiments to the Royal Society on the shocks delivered by the electric eel; that same year the surgeon and anatomist John Hunter described the structure of the fish's electric organs.
In 1791, Luigi Galvani published his discovery of bioelectromagnetics, demonstrating that electricity was the medium by which neurons passed signals to the muscles.
Alessandro Volta's battery, or voltaic pile, of 1800, made from alternating layers of zinc and copper, provided scientists with a more reliable source of electrical energy than the electrostatic machines previously used.
The recognition of electromagnetism, the unity of electric and magnetic phenomena, is due to Hans Christian Ørsted and André-Marie Ampère in 1819–1820.
Michael Faraday invented the electric motor in 1821, and Georg Ohm mathematically analysed the electrical circuit in 1827.
Electricity and magnetism (and light) were definitively linked by James Clerk Maxwell, in particular in his "On Physical Lines of Force" in 1861 and 1862.
While the early 19th century had seen rapid progress in electrical science, the late 19th century would see the greatest progress in electrical engineering.
Through such people as Alexander Graham Bell, Ottó Bláthy, Thomas Edison, Galileo Ferraris, Oliver Heaviside, Ányos Jedlik, William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin, Charles Algernon Parsons, Werner von Siemens, Joseph Swan, Reginald Fessenden, Nikola Tesla and George Westinghouse, electricity turned from a scientific curiosity into an essential tool for modern life.
In 1887, Heinrich Hertz discovered that electrodes illuminated with ultraviolet light create electric sparks more easily.
In 1905, Albert Einstein published a paper that explained experimental data from the photoelectric effect as being the result of light energy being carried in discrete quantized packets, energising electrons.
This discovery led to the quantum revolution.
Einstein was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1921 for "his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect".
The photoelectric effect is also employed in photocells such as can be found in solar panels.
The first solid-state device was the "cat's-whisker detector" first used in the 1900s in radio receivers.
A whisker-like wire is placed lightly in contact with a solid crystal (such as a germanium crystal) to detect a radio signal by the contact junction effect.
In a solid-state component, the current is confined to solid elements and compounds engineered specifically to switch and amplify it.
Current flow can be understood in two forms: as negatively charged electrons, and as positively charged electron deficiencies called holes.
These charges and holes are understood in terms of quantum physics.
The building material is most often a crystalline semiconductor.
Solid-state electronics came into its own with the emergence of transistor technology.
The first working transistor, a germanium-based point-contact transistor, was invented by John Bardeen and Walter Houser Brattain at Bell Labs in 1947, followed by the bipolar junction transistor in 1948.
By modern convention, the charge carried by electrons is defined as negative, and that by protons is positive.
Before these particles were discovered, Benjamin Franklin had defined a positive charge as being the charge acquired by a glass rod when it is rubbed with a silk cloth.
A proton by definition carries a charge of exactly 1.
This value is also defined as the elementary charge.
No object can have a charge smaller than the elementary charge, and any amount of charge an object may carry is a multiple of the elementary charge.
An electron has an equal negative charge, i.
Charge is possessed not just by matter, but also by antimatter, each antiparticle bearing an equal and opposite charge to its corresponding particle.
The presence of charge gives rise to an electrostatic force: charges exert a force on each other, an effect that was known, though not understood, in antiquity.
A lightweight ball suspended by a fine thread can be charged by touching it with a glass rod that has itself been charged by rubbing with a cloth.
If a similar ball is charged by the same glass rod, it is found to repel the first: the charge acts to force the two balls apart.
Two balls that are charged with a rubbed amber rod also repel each other.
However, if one ball is charged by the glass rod, and the other by an amber rod, the two balls are found to attract each other.
These phenomena were investigated in the late eighteenth century by Charles-Augustin de Coulomb, who deduced that charge manifests itself in two opposing forms.
This discovery led to the well-known axiom: like-charged objects repel and opposite-charged objects attract.
The force acts on the charged particles themselves, hence charge has a tendency to spread itself as evenly as possible over a conducting surface.
The magnitude of the electromagnetic force, whether attractive or repulsive, is given by Coulomb's law, which relates the force to the product of the charges and has an inverse-square relation to the distance between them.
The electromagnetic force is very strong, second only in strength to the strong interaction, but unlike that force it operates over all distances.
In comparison with the much weaker gravitational force, the electromagnetic force pushing two electrons apart is 1042 times that of the gravitational attraction pulling them together.
Charge originates from certain types of subatomic particles, the most familiar carriers of which are the electron and proton.
Electric charge gives rise to and interacts with the electromagnetic force, one of the four fundamental forces of nature.
Experiment has shown charge to be a conserved quantity, that is, the net charge within an electrically isolated system will always remain constant regardless of any changes taking place within that system.
Within the system, charge may be transferred between bodies, either by direct contact or by passing along a conducting material, such as a wire.
The informal term static electricity refers to the net presence (or 'imbalance') of charge on a body, usually caused when dissimilar materials are rubbed together, transferring charge from one to the other.
Charge can be measured by a number of means, an early instrument being the gold-leaf electroscope, which although still in use for classroom demonstrations, has been superseded by the electronic electrometer.
The movement of electric charge is known as an electric current, the intensity of which is usually measured in amperes.
Current can consist of any moving charged particles; most commonly these are electrons, but any charge in motion constitutes a current.
Electric current can flow through some things, electrical conductors, but will not flow through an electrical insulator.
By historical convention, a positive current is defined as having the same direction of flow as any positive charge it contains, or to flow from the most positive part of a circuit to the most negative part.
Current defined in this manner is called conventional current.
The motion of negatively charged electrons around an electric circuit, one of the most familiar forms of current, is thus deemed positive in the opposite direction to that of the electrons.
However, depending on the conditions, an electric current can consist of a flow of charged particles in either direction or even in both directions at once.
The positive-to-negative convention is widely used to simplify this situation.
The process by which electric current passes through a material is termed electrical conduction, and its nature varies with that of the charged particles and the material through which they are travelling.
Examples of electric currents include metallic conduction, where electrons flow through a conductor such as metal, and electrolysis, where ions (charged atoms) flow through liquids, or through plasmas such as electrical sparks.
While the particles themselves can move quite slowly, sometimes with an average drift velocity only fractions of a millimetre per second, the electric field that drives them itself propagates at close to the speed of light, enabling electrical signals to pass rapidly along wires.
Current causes several observable effects, which historically were the means of recognising its presence.
That water could be decomposed by the current from a voltaic pile was discovered by Nicholson and Carlisle in 1800, a process now known as electrolysis.
Their work was greatly expanded upon by Michael Faraday in 1833.
Current through a resistance causes localised heating, an effect James Prescott Joule studied mathematically in 1840.
One of the most important discoveries relating to current was made accidentally by Hans Christian Ørsted in 1820, when, while preparing a lecture, he witnessed the current in a wire disturbing the needle of a magnetic compass.
He had discovered electromagnetism, a fundamental interaction between electricity and magnetics.
The level of electromagnetic emissions generated by electric arcing is high enough to produce electromagnetic interference, which can be detrimental to the workings of adjacent equipment.
In engineering or household applications, current is often described as being either direct current (DC) or alternating current (AC).
These terms refer to how the current varies in time.
Direct current, as produced by example from a battery and required by most electronic devices, is a unidirectional flow from the positive part of a circuit to the negative.
If, as is most common, this flow is carried by electrons, they will be travelling in the opposite direction.
Alternating current is any current that reverses direction repeatedly; almost always this takes the form of a sine wave.
Alternating current thus pulses back and forth within a conductor without the charge moving any net distance over time.
The time-averaged value of an alternating current is zero, but it delivers energy in first one direction, and then the reverse.
Alternating current is affected by electrical properties that are not observed under steady state direct current, such as inductance and capacitance.
These properties however can become important when circuitry is subjected to transients, such as when first energised.
The concept of the electric field was introduced by Michael Faraday.
An electric field is created by a charged body in the space that surrounds it, and results in a force exerted on any other charges placed within the field.
The electric field acts between two charges in a similar manner to the way that the gravitational field acts between two masses, and like it, extends towards infinity and shows an inverse square relationship with distance.
However, there is an important difference.
Gravity always acts in attraction, drawing two masses together, while the electric field can result in either attraction or repulsion.
Since large bodies such as planets generally carry no net charge, the electric field at a distance is usually zero.
Thus gravity is the dominant force at distance in the universe, despite being much weaker.
An electric field generally varies in space, and its strength at any one point is defined as the force (per unit charge) that would be felt by a stationary, negligible charge if placed at that point.
The conceptual charge, termed a 'test charge', must be vanishingly small to prevent its own electric field disturbing the main field and must also be stationary to prevent the effect of magnetic fields.
As the electric field is defined in terms of force, and force is a vector, having both magnitude and direction, it follows that an electric field is a vector field.
The study of electric fields created by stationary charges is called electrostatics.
The field may be visualised by a set of imaginary lines whose direction at any point is the same as that of the field.
This concept was introduced by Faraday, whose term 'lines of force' still sometimes sees use.
The field lines are the paths that a point positive charge would seek to make as it was forced to move within the field; they are however an imaginary concept with no physical existence, and the field permeates all the intervening space between the lines.
Field lines emanating from stationary charges have several key properties: first, they originate at positive charges and terminate at negative charges; second, they must enter any good conductor at right angles, and third, they may never cross nor close in on themselves.
A hollow conducting body carries all its charge on its outer surface.
The field is therefore 0 at all places inside the body.
This is the operating principle of the Faraday cage, a conducting metal shell that isolates its interior from outside electrical effects.
The principles of electrostatics are important when designing items of high-voltage equipment.
There is a finite limit to the electric field strength that may be withstood by any medium.
Beyond this point, electrical breakdown occurs and an electric arc causes flashover between the charged parts.
Air, for example, tends to arc across small gaps at electric field strengths which exceed 30 kV per centimetre.
Over larger gaps, its breakdown strength is weaker, perhaps 1 kV per centimetre.
The most visible natural occurrence of this is lightning, caused when charge becomes separated in the clouds by rising columns of air, and raises the electric field in the air to greater than it can withstand.
The voltage of a large lightning cloud may be as high as 100 MV and have discharge energies as great as 250 kWh.
The field strength is greatly affected by nearby conducting objects, and it is particularly intense when it is forced to curve around sharply pointed objects.
This principle is exploited in the lightning conductor, the sharp spike of which acts to encourage the lightning strike to develop there, rather than to the building it serves to protect.
The concept of electric potential is closely linked to that of the electric field.
A small charge placed within an electric field experiences a force, and to have brought that charge to that point against the force requires work.
The electric potential at any point is defined as the energy required to bring a unit test charge from an infinite distance slowly to that point.
It is usually measured in volts, and one volt is the potential for which one joule of work must be expended to bring a charge of one coulomb from infinity.
This definition of potential, while formal, has little practical application, and a more useful concept is that of electric potential difference, and is the energy required to move a unit charge between two specified points.
The electric field is conservative, which means that the path taken by the test charge is irrelevant: all paths between two specified points expend the same energy, and thus a unique value for potential difference may be stated.
The volt is so strongly identified as the unit of choice for measurement and description of electric potential difference that the term voltage sees greater everyday usage.
For practical purposes, defining a common reference point to which potentials may be expressed and compared is useful.
While this could be at infinity, a much more useful reference is the Earth itself, which is assumed to be at the same potential everywhere.
This reference point naturally takes the name earth or ground.
Earth is assumed to be an infinite source of equal amounts of positive and negative charge and is therefore electrically uncharged—and unchargeable.
Electric potential is a scalar quantity.
That is, it has only magnitude and not direction.
It may be viewed as analogous to height: just as a released object will fall through a difference in heights caused by a gravitational field, so a charge will 'fall' across the voltage caused by an electric field.
As relief maps show contour lines marking points of equal height, a set of lines marking points of equal potential (known as equipotentials) may be drawn around an electrostatically charged object.
The equipotentials cross all lines of force at right angles.
They must also lie parallel to a conductor's surface, since otherwise there would be a force along the surface of the conductor that would move the charge carriers to even the potential across the surface.
The electric field was formally defined as the force exerted per unit charge, but the concept of potential allows for a more useful and equivalent definition: the electric field is the local gradient of the electric potential.
Usually expressed in volts per metre, the vector direction of the field is the line of greatest slope of potential, and where the equipotentials lie closest together.
Ørsted's discovery in 1821 that a magnetic field existed around all sides of a wire carrying an electric current indicated that there was a direct relationship between electricity and magnetism.
Moreover, the interaction seemed different from gravitational and electrostatic forces, the two forces of nature then known.
The force on the compass needle did not direct it to or away from the current-carrying wire, but acted at right angles to it.
Ørsted's words were that "the electric conflict acts in a revolving manner.
Ørsted did not fully understand his discovery, but he observed the effect was reciprocal: a current exerts a force on a magnet, and a magnetic field exerts a force on a current.
The phenomenon was further investigated by Ampère, who discovered that two parallel current-carrying wires exerted a force upon each other: two wires conducting currents in the same direction are attracted to each other, while wires containing currents in opposite directions are forced apart.
The interaction is mediated by the magnetic field each current produces and forms the basis for the international definition of the ampere.
This relationship between magnetic fields and currents is extremely important, for it led to Michael Faraday's invention of the electric motor in 1821.
Faraday's homopolar motor consisted of a permanent magnet sitting in a pool of mercury.
A current was allowed through a wire suspended from a pivot above the magnet and dipped into the mercury.
The magnet exerted a tangential force on the wire, making it circle around the magnet for as long as the current was maintained.
Experimentation by Faraday in 1831 revealed that a wire moving perpendicular to a magnetic field developed a potential difference between its ends.
Further analysis of this process, known as electromagnetic induction, enabled him to state the principle, now known as Faraday's law of induction, that the potential difference induced in a closed circuit is proportional to the rate of change of magnetic flux through the loop.
Exploitation of this discovery enabled him to invent the first electrical generator in 1831, in which he converted the mechanical energy of a rotating copper disc to electrical energy.
Faraday's disc was inefficient and of no use as a practical generator, but it showed the possibility of generating electric power using magnetism, a possibility that would be taken up by those that followed on from his work.
An electric circuit is an interconnection of electric components such that electric charge is made to flow along a closed path (a circuit), usually to perform some useful task.
The components in an electric circuit can take many forms, which can include elements such as resistors, capacitors, switches, transformers and electronics.
Electronic circuits contain active components, usually semiconductors, and typically exhibit non-linear behaviour, requiring complex analysis.
The simplest electric components are those that are termed passive and linear: while they may temporarily store energy, they contain no sources of it, and exhibit linear responses to stimuli.
The resistor is perhaps the simplest of passive circuit elements: as its name suggests, it resists the current through it, dissipating its energy as heat.
The resistance is a consequence of the motion of charge through a conductor: in metals, for example, resistance is primarily due to collisions between electrons and ions.
Ohm's law is a basic law of circuit theory, stating that the current passing through a resistance is directly proportional to the potential difference across it.
The resistance of most materials is relatively constant over a range of temperatures and currents; materials under these conditions are known as 'ohmic'.
The ohm, the unit of resistance, was named in honour of Georg Ohm, and is symbolised by the Greek letter Ω.
The capacitor is a development of the Leyden jar and is a device that can store charge, and thereby storing electrical energy in the resulting field.
It consists of two conducting plates separated by a thin insulating dielectric layer; in practice, thin metal foils are coiled together, increasing the surface area per unit volume and therefore the capacitance.
The unit of capacitance is the farad, named after Michael Faraday, and given the symbol F: one farad is the capacitance that develops a potential difference of one volt when it stores a charge of one coulomb.
A capacitor connected to a voltage supply initially causes a current as it accumulates charge; this current will however decay in time as the capacitor fills, eventually falling to zero.
A capacitor will therefore not permit a steady state current, but instead blocks it.
The inductor is a conductor, usually a coil of wire, that stores energy in a magnetic field in response to the current through it.
When the current changes, the magnetic field does too, inducing a voltage between the ends of the conductor.
The induced voltage is proportional to the time rate of change of the current.
The constant of proportionality is termed the inductance.
The unit of inductance is the henry, named after Joseph Henry, a contemporary of Faraday.
One henry is the inductance that will induce a potential difference of one volt if the current through it changes at a rate of one ampere per second.
The inductor's behaviour is in some regards converse to that of the capacitor: it will freely allow an unchanging current but opposes a rapidly changing one.
Electric power is the rate at which electric energy is transferred by an electric circuit.
The SI unit of power is the watt, one joule per second.
Electric power, like mechanical power, is the rate of doing work, measured in watts, and represented by the letter P.
The term wattage is used colloquially to mean "electric power in watts.
Electric power is generally supplied to businesses and homes by the electric power industry.
Electricity is usually sold by the kilowatt hour (3.
Electric utilities measure power using electricity meters, which keep a running total of the electric energy delivered to a customer.
Unlike fossil fuels, electricity is a low entropy form of energy and can be converted into motion or many other forms of energy with high efficiency.
Electronics deals with electrical circuits that involve active electrical components such as vacuum tubes, transistors, diodes, sensors and integrated circuits, and associated passive interconnection technologies.
The nonlinear behaviour of active components and their ability to control electron flows makes digital switching possible, and electronics is widely used in information processing, telecommunications, and signal processing.
Interconnection technologies such as circuit boards, electronics packaging technology, and other varied forms of communication infrastructure complete circuit functionality and transform the mixed components into a regular working system.
Today, most electronic devices use semiconductor components to perform electron control.
The underlying principles that explain how semiconductors work are studied in solid state physics, whereas the design and construction of electronic circuits to solve practical problems are part of electronics engineering.
Electronic devices make use of the transistor, perhaps one of the most important inventions of the twentieth century, and a fundamental building block of all modern circuitry.
A modern integrated circuit may contain many billions of miniaturised transistors in a region only a few centimetres square.
Faraday's and Ampère's work showed that a time-varying magnetic field created an electric field, and a time-varying electric field created a magnetic field.
Thus, when either field is changing in time, a field of the other is always induced.
These variations are an electromagnetic wave.
Electromagnetic waves were analysed theoretically by James Clerk Maxwell in 1864.
Maxwell developed a set of equations that could unambiguously describe the interrelationship between electric field, magnetic field, electric charge, and electric current.
He could moreover prove that in a vacuum such a wave would travel at the speed of light, and thus light itself was a form of electromagnetic radiation.
Maxwell's equations, which unify light, fields, and charge are one of the great milestones of theoretical physics.
The work of many researchers enabled the use of electronics to convert signals into high frequency oscillating currents and, via suitably shaped conductors, electricity permits the transmission and reception of these signals via radio waves over very long distances.
In the 6th century BC the Greek philosopher Thales of Miletus experimented with amber rods: these were the first studies into the production of electricity.
While this method, now known as the triboelectric effect, can lift light objects and generate sparks, it is extremely inefficient.
It was not until the invention of the voltaic pile in the eighteenth century that a viable source of electricity became available.
The voltaic pile, and its modern descendant, the electrical battery, store energy chemically and make it available on demand in the form of electricity.
Electrical power is usually generated by electro-mechanical generators.
These can be driven by steam produced from fossil fuel combustion or the heat released from nuclear reactions, but also more directly from the kinetic energy of wind or flowing water.
The steam turbine invented by Sir Charles Parsons in 1884 is still used to convert the thermal energy of steam into a rotary motion that can be used by electro-mechanical generators.
Such generators bear no resemblance to Faraday's homopolar disc generator of 1831, but they still rely on his electromagnetic principle that a conductor linking a changing magnetic field induces a potential difference across its ends.
Electricity generated by solar panels rely on a different mechanism: solar radiation is converted directly into electricity using the photovoltaic effect.
Demand for electricity grows with great rapidity as a nation modernises and its economy develops.
The United States showed a 12% increase in demand during each year of the first three decades of the twentieth century, a rate of growth that is now being experienced by emerging economies such as those of India or China.
Environmental concerns with electricity generation, in particular the contribution of fossil fuel burning to climate change, have led to an increased focus on generation from renewable sources.
In the power sector, wind and solar have become cost-effective, speeding up an energy transition away from fossil fuels.
The invention in the late nineteenth century of the transformer meant that electrical power could be transmitted more efficiently at a higher voltage but lower current.
Efficient electrical transmission meant in turn that electricity could be generated at centralised power stations, where it benefited from economies of scale, and then be despatched relatively long distances to where it was needed.
Normally, demand for electricity must match the supply, as storage of electricity is difficult.
A certain amount of generation must always be held in reserve to cushion an electrical grid against inevitable disturbances and losses.
With increasing levels of variable renewable energy (wind and solar energy) in the grid, it has become more challenging to match supply and demand.
Storage plays an increasing role in bridging that gap.
There are four types of energy storage technologies, each in varying states of technology readiness: batteries (electrochemical storage), chemical storage such as hydrogen, thermal or mechanical (such as pumped hydropower).
Electricity is a very convenient way to transfer energy, and it has been adapted to a huge, and growing, number of uses.
The invention of a practical incandescent light bulb in the 1870s led to lighting becoming one of the first publicly available applications of electrical power.
Although electrification brought with it its own dangers, replacing the naked flames of gas lighting greatly reduced fire hazards within homes and factories.
Public utilities were set up in many cities targeting the burgeoning market for electrical lighting.
In the late 20th century and in modern times, the trend has started to flow in the direction of deregulation in the electrical power sector.
The resistive Joule heating effect employed in filament light bulbs also sees more direct use in electric heating.
While this is versatile and controllable, it can be seen as wasteful, since most electrical generation has already required the production of heat at a power station.
A number of countries, such as Denmark, have issued legislation restricting or banning the use of resistive electric heating in new buildings.
Electricity is however still a highly practical energy source for heating and refrigeration, with air conditioning/heat pumps representing a growing sector for electricity demand for heating and cooling, the effects of which electricity utilities are increasingly obliged to accommodate.
Electrification is expected to play a major role in the decarbonisation of sectors that rely on direct fossil fuel burning, such as transport (using electric vehicles) and heating (using heat pumps).
The effects of electromagnetism are most visibly employed in the electric motor, which provides a clean and efficient means of motive power.
A stationary motor such as a winch is easily provided with a supply of power, but a motor that moves with its application, such as an electric vehicle, is obliged to either carry along a power source such as a battery or to collect current from a sliding contact such as a pantograph.
Electrically powered vehicles are used in public transportation, such as electric buses and trains, and electric cars.
Electricity is used within telecommunications, and electrical telegraphs.
With the construction of transcontinental, and transatlantic telegraph systems in the 1860s, electricity had enabled communications in minutes across the globe.
A voltage applied to a human body causes an electric current through the tissues, and although the relationship is non-linear, the greater the voltage, the greater the current.
The threshold for perception varies with the supply frequency and with the path of the current, but is about 0.
If the current is sufficiently high, it will cause muscle contraction, fibrillation of the heart, and tissue burns.
The lack of any visible sign that a conductor is electrified makes electricity a particular hazard.
The pain caused by an electric shock can be intense, leading electricity at times to be employed as a method of torture.
Death caused by an electric shock—electrocution—is still used for judicial execution in some US states, though its use had become very rare by the end of the 20th century.
Electricity is not a human invention, and may be observed in several forms in nature, notably lightning.
Many interactions familiar at the macroscopic level, such as touch, friction or chemical bonding, are due to interactions between electric fields on the atomic scale.
The Earth's magnetic field is due to the natural dynamo of circulating currents in the planet's core.
Certain crystals, such as quartz, or even sugar, generate a potential difference across their faces when pressed.
This phenomenon is known as piezoelectricity, from the Greek piezein (πιέζειν), meaning to press, and was discovered in 1880 by Pierre and Jacques Curie.
The effect is reciprocal: when a piezoelectric material is subjected to an electric field it changes size slightly.
Some organisms, such as sharks, are able to detect and respond to changes in electric fields, an ability known as electroreception, while others, termed electrogenic, are able to generate voltages themselves to serve as a predatory or defensive weapon; these are electric fish in different orders.
The order Gymnotiformes, of which the best-known example is the electric eel, detect or stun their prey via high voltages generated from modified muscle cells called electrocytes.
All animals transmit information along their cell membranes with voltage pulses called action potentials, whose functions include communication by the nervous system between neurons and muscles.
An electric shock stimulates this system and causes muscles to contract.
Action potentials are also responsible for coordinating activities in certain plants.
It is said that in the 1850s, British politician William Ewart Gladstone asked the scientist Michael Faraday why electricity was valuable.
Faraday answered, "One day sir, you may tax it.
In the 19th and early 20th centuries, electricity was not part of the everyday life of many people, even in the industrialised Western world.
The popular culture of the time accordingly often depicted it as a mysterious, quasi-magical force that can slay the living, revive the dead or otherwise bend the laws of nature.
This attitude began with the 1771 experiments of Luigi Galvani in which the legs of dead frogs were shown to twitch on application of animal electricity.
These results were known to Mary Shelley when she authored Frankenstein (1819), although she does not name the method of revitalization of the monster.
The revitalization of monsters with electricity later became a stock theme in horror films.
As public familiarity with electricity as the lifeblood of the Second Industrial Revolution grew, its wielders were more often cast in a positive light, such as the workers who "finger death at their gloves' end as they piece and repiece the living wires" in Rudyard Kipling's 1907 poem Sons of Martha.
Electrically powered vehicles of every sort featured large in adventure stories such as those of Jules Verne and the Tom Swift books.
The masters of electricity, whether fictional or real—including scientists such as Thomas Edison, Charles Steinmetz or Nikola Tesla—were popularly conceived of as having wizard-like powers.
With electricity ceasing to be a novelty and becoming a necessity of everyday life in the later half of the 20th century, it acquired particular attention by popular culture only when it stops flowing, an event that usually signals disaster.
The people who keep it flowing, such as the nameless hero of Jimmy Webb's song "Wichita Lineman" (1968), are still often cast as heroic, wizard-like figures.
Ampère's circuital law, connects the direction of an electric current and its associated magnetic currents.
Benjamin, Park (1898), A history of electricity: (The intellectual rise in electricity) from antiquity to the days of Benjamin Franklin, New York: J.
Hammond, Percy (1981), "Electromagnetism for Engineers", Nature, 168 (4262), Pergamon: 4–5, Bibcode:1951Natur.
Basic Concepts of Electricity chapter from Lessons In Electric Circuits Vol 1 DC book and series.
A computer is a machine that can be programmed to automatically carry out sequences of arithmetic or logical operations (computation).
Modern digital electronic computers can perform generic sets of operations known as programs, which enable computers to perform a wide range of tasks.
The term computer system may refer to a nominally complete computer that includes the hardware, operating system, software, and peripheral equipment needed and used for full operation, or to a group of computers that are linked and function together, such as a computer network or computer cluster.
Numbering only a few in the 1930s, today computers are ubiquitous over a broad range of industrial and consumer products that use computers as control systems.
The price, size, and complexity of computers can range from simple single-purpose devices like key fobs, microwave ovens, and remote controls up to super computers and factories using industrial robots.
Computers are at the core of general-purpose devices such as personal computers and mobile devices, such as smartphones.
Computers power the Internet, which links billions of computers and users.
Early computers were meant to be used only for calculations.
Simple manual instruments like the abacus have aided people in doing calculations since ancient times.
Early in the Industrial Revolution, some mechanical devices were built to automate long, tedious tasks, such as guiding patterns for looms.
More sophisticated electrical machines did specialized analog calculations in the early 20th century.
Early digital electronic calculating machines were developed during World War II, beginning with electromechanicals (1930s), thermionic valves (1930s), semiconductor transistors (1940s), MOSFET (MOS transistors 1950s), and finally monolithic integrated circuits (1950s+).
With each technology advancement resulting in smaller, more efficient circuit designs that lead to the microprocessor and the microcomputer revolution in the 1970s.
Since then the speed, computing power, and versatility of computers have been increasing dramatically with transistor counts increasing at a rapid pace (Moore's law noted that counts doubled every two years), leading to the Digital Revolution during the late 20th and early 21st centuries.
Conventionally, a modern computer consists of at least one processing element, typically a central processing unit (CPU) in the form of a microprocessor, together with some type of computer memory, typically semiconductor memory chips.
The processing element carries out arithmetic and logical operations, and a sequencing and control unit can change the order of operations in response to stored information.
Peripheral devices include input devices (keyboards, mice, joysticks, etc.
Peripheral devices allow information to be retrieved from an external source, and they enable the results of operations to be saved and retrieved.
It was not until the mid-20th century that the word acquired its modern definition; according to the Oxford English Dictionary, the first known use of the word computer was in a different sense, in a 1613 book called The Yong Mans Gleanings by the English writer Richard Brathwait: "I haue [sic] read the truest computer of Times, and the best Arithmetician that euer [sic] breathed, and he reduceth thy dayes into a short number.
The word continued to have the same meaning until the middle of the 20th century.
During the latter part of this period, women were often hired as computers because they could be paid less than their male counterparts.
By 1943, most human computers were women.
The Online Etymology Dictionary gives the first attested use of computer in the 1640s, meaning 'one who calculates'; this is an "agent noun from compute (v.
The Online Etymology Dictionary states that the use of the term to mean "'calculating machine' (of any type) is from 1897.
The name has remained, although modern computers are capable of many higher-level functions.
Devices have been used to aid computation for thousands of years, mostly using one-to-one correspondence with fingers.
The earliest counting device was most likely a form of tally stick.
Later record keeping aids throughout the Fertile Crescent included calculi (clay spheres, cones, etc.
The use of counting rods is one example.
The abacus was initially used for arithmetic tasks.
The Roman abacus was developed from devices used in Babylonia as early as 2400 BCE.
Since then, many other forms of reckoning boards or tables have been invented.
In a medieval European counting house, a checkered cloth would be placed on a table, and markers moved around on it according to certain rules, as an aid to calculating sums of money.
The Antikythera mechanism is believed to be the earliest known mechanical analog computer, according to Derek J.
It was designed to calculate astronomical positions.
It was discovered in 1901 in the Antikythera wreck off the Greek island of Antikythera, between Kythera and Crete, and has been dated to approximately c.
Devices of comparable complexity to the Antikythera mechanism would not reappear until the fourteenth century.
Many mechanical aids to calculation and measurement were constructed for astronomical and navigation use.
The planisphere was a star chart invented by Abū Rayhān al-Bīrūnī in the early 11th century.
The astrolabe was invented in the Hellenistic world in either the 1st or 2nd centuries BCE and is often attributed to Hipparchus.
A combination of the planisphere and dioptra, the astrolabe was effectively an analog computer capable of working out several different kinds of problems in spherical astronomy.
An astrolabe incorporating a mechanical calendar computer and gear-wheels was invented by Abi Bakr of Isfahan, Persia in 1235.
Abū Rayhān al-Bīrūnī invented the first mechanical geared lunisolar calendar astrolabe, an early fixed-wired knowledge processing machine with a gear train and gear-wheels, c.
The sector, a calculating instrument used for solving problems in proportion, trigonometry, multiplication and division, and for various functions, such as squares and cube roots, was developed in the late 16th century and found application in gunnery, surveying, and navigation.
The planimeter was a manual instrument to calculate the area of a closed figure by tracing over it with a mechanical linkage.
The slide rule was invented around 1620–1630 by the English clergyman William Oughtred, shortly after the publication of the concept of the logarithm.
It is a hand-operated analog computer for doing multiplication and division.
As slide rule development progressed, added scales provided reciprocals, squares and square roots, cubes and cube roots, as well as transcendental functions such as logarithms and exponentials, circular and hyperbolic trigonometry, and other functions.
Slide rules with special scales are still used for quick performance of routine calculations, such as the E6B circular slide rule used for time and distance calculations on light aircraft.
In the 1770s, Pierre Jaquet-Droz, a Swiss watchmaker, built a mechanical doll (automaton) that could write holding a quill pen.
By switching the number and order of its internal wheels, different letters, and hence different messages, could be produced.
In effect, it could be mechanically "programmed" to read instructions.
Along with two other complex machines, the doll is at the Musée d'Art et d'Histoire of Neuchâtel, Switzerland, and still operates.
In 1831–1835, mathematician and engineer Giovanni Plana devised a Perpetual Calendar machine, which through a system of pulleys and cylinders could predict the perpetual calendar for every year from 0 CE (that is, 1 BCE) to 4000 CE, keeping track of leap years and varying day length.
The tide-predicting machine invented by the Scottish scientist Sir William Thomson in 1872 was of great utility to navigation in shallow waters.
It used a system of pulleys and wires to automatically calculate predicted tide levels for a set period at a particular location.
The differential analyser, a mechanical analog computer designed to solve differential equations by integration, used wheel-and-disc mechanisms to perform the integration.
In 1876, Sir William Thomson had already discussed the possible construction of such calculators, but he had been stymied by the limited output torque of the ball-and-disk integrators.
In a differential analyzer, the output of one integrator drove the input of the next integrator, or a graphing output.
The torque amplifier was the advance that allowed these machines to work.
Starting in the 1920s, Vannevar Bush and others developed mechanical differential analyzers.
In the 1890s, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres Quevedo began to develop a series of advanced analog machines that could solve real and complex roots of polynomials, which were published in 1901 by the Paris Academy of Sciences.
Charles Babbage, an English mechanical engineer and polymath, originated the concept of a programmable computer.
Considered the "father of the computer", he conceptualized and invented the first mechanical computer in the early 19th century.
After working on his difference engine he announced his invention in 1822, in a paper to the Royal Astronomical Society, titled "Note on the application of machinery to the computation of astronomical and mathematical tables".
He also designed to aid in navigational calculations, in 1833 he realized that a much more general design, an analytical engine, was possible.
The input of programs and data was to be provided to the machine via punched cards, a method being used at the time to direct mechanical looms such as the Jacquard loom.
For output, the machine would have a printer, a curve plotter, and a bell.
The machine would also be able to punch numbers onto cards to be read later.
The engine would incorporate an arithmetic logic unit, control flow in the form of conditional branching and loops, and integrated memory, making it the first design for a general-purpose computer that could be described in modern terms as Turing-complete.
The machine was about a century ahead of its time.
All the parts for his machine had to be made by hand – this was a major problem for a device with thousands of parts.
Eventually, the project was dissolved with the decision of the British Government to cease funding.
Babbage's failure to complete the analytical engine can be chiefly attributed to political and financial difficulties as well as his desire to develop an increasingly sophisticated computer and to move ahead faster than anyone else could follow.
Nevertheless, his son, Henry Babbage, completed a simplified version of the analytical engine's computing unit (the mill) in 1888.
He gave a successful demonstration of its use in computing tables in 1906.
In his work Essays on Automatics published in 1914, Leonardo Torres Quevedo wrote a brief history of Babbage's efforts at constructing a mechanical Difference Engine and Analytical Engine.
The whole machine was to be controlled by a read-only program, which was complete with provisions for conditional branching.
He also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.
In 1920, to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, which allowed a user to input arithmetic problems through a keyboard, and computed and printed the results, demonstrating the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine.
During the first half of the 20th century, many scientific computing needs were met by increasingly sophisticated analog computers, which used a direct mechanical or electrical model of the problem as a basis for computation.
However, these were not programmable and generally lacked the versatility and accuracy of modern digital computers.
The first modern analog computer was a tide-predicting machine, invented by Sir William Thomson (later to become Lord Kelvin) in 1872.
The differential analyser, a mechanical analog computer designed to solve differential equations by integration using wheel-and-disc mechanisms, was conceptualized in 1876 by James Thomson, the elder brother of the more famous Sir William Thomson.
The art of mechanical analog computing reached its zenith with the differential analyzer, completed in 1931 by Vannevar Bush at MIT.
By the 1950s, the success of digital electronic computers had spelled the end for most analog computing machines, but analog computers remained in use during the 1950s in some specialized applications such as education (slide rule) and aircraft (control systems).
Claude Shannon's 1937 master's thesis laid the foundations of digital computing, with his insight of applying Boolean algebra to the analysis and synthesis of switching circuits being the basic concept which underlies all electronic digital computers.
By 1938, the United States Navy had developed the Torpedo Data Computer, an electromechanical analog computer for submarines that used trigonometry to solve the problem of firing a torpedo at a moving target.
During World War II, similar devices were developed in other countries.
Early digital computers were electromechanical; electric switches drove mechanical relays to perform the calculation.
These devices had a low operating speed and were eventually superseded by much faster all-electric computers, originally using vacuum tubes.
The Z2, created by German engineer Konrad Zuse in 1939 in Berlin, was one of the earliest examples of an electromechanical relay computer.
In 1941, Zuse followed his earlier machine with the Z3, the world's first working electromechanical programmable, fully automatic digital computer.
The Z3 was built with 2000 relays, implementing a 22-bit word length that operated at a clock frequency of about 5–10 Hz.
Program code was supplied on punched film while data could be stored in 64 words of memory or supplied from the keyboard.
It was quite similar to modern machines in some respects, pioneering numerous advances such as floating-point numbers.
Rather than the harder-to-implement decimal system (used in Charles Babbage's earlier design), using a binary system meant that Zuse's machines were easier to build and potentially more reliable, given the technologies available at that time.
The Z3 was not itself a universal computer but could be extended to be Turing complete.
Zuse's next computer, the Z4, became the world's first commercial computer; after initial delay due to the Second World War, it was completed in 1950 and delivered to the ETH Zurich.
The computer was manufactured by Zuse's own company, Zuse KG, which was founded in 1941 as the first company with the sole purpose of developing computers in Berlin.
The Z4 served as the inspiration for the construction of the ERMETH, the first Swiss computer and one of the first in Europe.
Purely electronic circuit elements soon replaced their mechanical and electromechanical equivalents, at the same time that digital calculation replaced analog.
The engineer Tommy Flowers, working at the Post Office Research Station in London in the 1930s, began to explore the possible use of electronics for the telephone exchange.
Experimental equipment that he built in 1934 went into operation five years later, converting a portion of the telephone exchange network into an electronic data processing system, using thousands of vacuum tubes.
In the US, John Vincent Atanasoff and Clifford E.
Berry of Iowa State University developed and tested the Atanasoff–Berry Computer (ABC) in 1942, the first "automatic electronic digital computer".
This design was also all-electronic and used about 300 vacuum tubes, with capacitors fixed in a mechanically rotating drum for memory.
During World War II, the British code-breakers at Bletchley Park achieved a number of successes in breaking encrypted German military communications.
The German encryption machine, Enigma, was first attacked with the help of the electro-mechanical bombes which were often run by women.
To crack the more sophisticated German Lorenz SZ 40/42 machine, used for high-level Army communications, Max Newman and his colleagues commissioned Flowers to build the Colossus.
He spent eleven months from early February 1943 designing and building the first Colossus.
After a functional test in December 1943, Colossus was shipped to Bletchley Park, where it was delivered on 18 January 1944 and attacked its first message on 5 February.
Colossus was the world's first electronic digital programmable computer.
It used a large number of valves (vacuum tubes).
It had paper-tape input and was capable of being configured to perform a variety of boolean logic algebraic operations on its data, but it was not Turing-complete.
Nine Mk II Colossi were built (The Mk I was converted to a Mk II, making ten machines in total).
Colossus Mark I contained 1,500 thermionic valves (tubes), but Mark II with 2,400 valves, was both five times faster and simpler to operate than Mark I, greatly speeding the decoding process.
The ENIAC (Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer) was the first electronic programmable computer built in the U.
Although the ENIAC was similar to the Colossus, it was much faster, more flexible, and it was Turing-complete.
Like the Colossus, a "program" on the ENIAC was defined by the states of its patch cables and switches, a far cry from the stored program electronic machines that came later.
Once a program was written, it had to be mechanically set into the machine with manual resetting of plugs and switches.
The programmers of the ENIAC were six women, often known collectively as the "ENIAC girls".
It combined the high speed of electronics with the ability to be programmed for many complex problems.
It could add or subtract 5000 times a second, a thousand times faster than any other machine.
It also had modules to multiply, divide, and take the square root.
High-speed memory was limited to 20 words (about 80 bytes).
Built under the direction of John Mauchly and J.
Presper Eckert at the University of Pennsylvania, ENIAC's development and construction lasted from 1943 to full operation at the end of 1945.
The machine was huge, weighing 30 tons, using 200 kilowatts of electric power and contained over 18,000 vacuum tubes, 1,500 relays, and hundreds of thousands of resistors, capacitors, and inductors.
The principle of the modern computer was proposed by Alan Turing in his seminal 1936 paper, On Computable Numbers.
Turing proposed a simple device that he called "Universal Computing machine" and that is now known as a universal Turing machine.
He proved that such a machine is capable of computing anything that is computable by executing instructions (program) stored on tape, allowing the machine to be programmable.
The fundamental concept of Turing's design is the stored program, where all the instructions for computing are stored in memory.
Von Neumann acknowledged that the central concept of the modern computer was due to this paper.
Turing machines are to this day a central object of study in theory of computation.
Except for the limitations imposed by their finite memory stores, modern computers are said to be Turing-complete, which is to say, they have algorithm execution capability equivalent to a universal Turing machine.
Early computing machines had fixed programs.
Changing its function required the re-wiring and re-structuring of the machine.
With the proposal of the stored-program computer this changed.
A stored-program computer includes by design an instruction set and can store in memory a set of instructions (a program) that details the computation.
The theoretical basis for the stored-program computer was laid out by Alan Turing in his 1936 paper.
In 1945, Turing joined the National Physical Laboratory and began work on developing an electronic stored-program digital computer.
His 1945 report "Proposed Electronic Calculator" was the first specification for such a device.
John von Neumann at the University of Pennsylvania also circulated his First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC in 1945.
The Manchester Baby was the world's first stored-program computer.
It was built at the University of Manchester in England by Frederic C.
Williams, Tom Kilburn and Geoff Tootill, and ran its first program on 21 June 1948.
It was designed as a testbed for the Williams tube, the first random-access digital storage device.
Although the computer was described as "small and primitive" by a 1998 retrospective, it was the first working machine to contain all of the elements essential to a modern electronic computer.
As soon as the Baby had demonstrated the feasibility of its design, a project began at the university to develop it into a practically useful computer, the Manchester Mark 1.
The Mark 1 in turn quickly became the prototype for the Ferranti Mark 1, the world's first commercially available general-purpose computer.
Built by Ferranti, it was delivered to the University of Manchester in February 1951.
At least seven of these later machines were delivered between 1953 and 1957, one of them to Shell labs in Amsterdam.
In October 1947 the directors of British catering company J.
Lyons & Company decided to take an active role in promoting the commercial development of computers.
Lyons's LEO I computer, modelled closely on the Cambridge EDSAC of 1949, became operational in April 1951 and ran the world's first routine office computer job.
The concept of a field-effect transistor was proposed by Julius Edgar Lilienfeld in 1925.
John Bardeen and Walter Brattain, while working under William Shockley at Bell Labs, built the first working transistor, the point-contact transistor, in 1947, which was followed by Shockley's bipolar junction transistor in 1948.
From 1955 onwards, transistors replaced vacuum tubes in computer designs, giving rise to the "second generation" of computers.
Compared to vacuum tubes, transistors have many advantages: they are smaller, and require less power than vacuum tubes, so give off less heat.
Junction transistors were much more reliable than vacuum tubes and had longer, indefinite, service life.
Transistorized computers could contain tens of thousands of binary logic circuits in a relatively compact space.
However, early junction transistors were relatively bulky devices that were difficult to manufacture on a mass-production basis, which limited them to a number of specialized applications.
At the University of Manchester, a team under the leadership of Tom Kilburn designed and built a machine using the newly developed transistors instead of valves.
Their first transistorized computer and the first in the world, was operational by 1953, and a second version was completed there in April 1955.
However, the machine did make use of valves to generate its 125 kHz clock waveforms and in the circuitry to read and write on its magnetic drum memory, so it was not the first completely transistorized computer.
That distinction goes to the Harwell CADET of 1955, built by the electronics division of the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell.
The metal–oxide–silicon field-effect transistor (MOSFET), also known as the MOS transistor, was invented at Bell Labs between 1955 and 1960 and was the first truly compact transistor that could be miniaturized and mass-produced for a wide range of uses.
With its high scalability, and much lower power consumption and higher density than bipolar junction transistors, the MOSFET made it possible to build high-density integrated circuits.
In addition to data processing, it also enabled the practical use of MOS transistors as memory cell storage elements, leading to the development of MOS semiconductor memory, which replaced earlier magnetic-core memory in computers.
The MOSFET led to the microcomputer revolution, and became the driving force behind the computer revolution.
The MOSFET is the most widely used transistor in computers, and is the fundamental building block of digital electronics.
The next great advance in computing power came with the advent of the integrated circuit (IC).
The idea of the integrated circuit was first conceived by a radar scientist working for the Royal Radar Establishment of the Ministry of Defence, Geoffrey W.
Dummer presented the first public description of an integrated circuit at the Symposium on Progress in Quality Electronic Components in Washington, D.
The first working ICs were invented by Jack Kilby at Texas Instruments and Robert Noyce at Fairchild Semiconductor.
Kilby recorded his initial ideas concerning the integrated circuit in July 1958, successfully demonstrating the first working integrated example on 12 September 1958.
In his patent application of 6 February 1959, Kilby described his new device as "a body of semiconductor material .
However, Kilby's invention was a hybrid integrated circuit (hybrid IC), rather than a monolithic integrated circuit (IC) chip.
Kilby's IC had external wire connections, which made it difficult to mass-produce.
Noyce also came up with his own idea of an integrated circuit half a year later than Kilby.
Noyce's invention was the first true monolithic IC chip, and solved many practical problems that Kilby's had not.
Produced at Fairchild Semiconductor, it was made of silicon, whereas Kilby's chip was made of germanium.
Noyce's monolithic IC was fabricated using the planar process, developed by his colleague Jean Hoerni in early 1959.
In turn, the planar process was based on Carl Frosch and Lincoln Derick work on semiconductor surface passivation by silicon dioxide.
Modern monolithic ICs are predominantly MOS (metal–oxide–semiconductor) integrated circuits, built from MOSFETs (MOS transistors).
The earliest experimental MOS IC to be fabricated was a 16-transistor chip built by Fred Heiman and Steven Hofstein at RCA in 1962.
General Microelectronics later introduced the first commercial MOS IC in 1964, developed by Robert Norman.
Following the development of the self-aligned gate (silicon-gate) MOS transistor by Robert Kerwin, Donald Klein and John Sarace at Bell Labs in 1967, the first silicon-gate MOS IC with self-aligned gates was developed by Federico Faggin at Fairchild Semiconductor in 1968.
The MOSFET has since become the most critical device component in modern ICs.
The development of the MOS integrated circuit led to the invention of the microprocessor, and heralded an explosion in the commercial and personal use of computers.
While the subject of exactly which device was the first microprocessor is contentious, partly due to lack of agreement on the exact definition of the term "microprocessor", it is largely undisputed that the first single-chip microprocessor was the Intel 4004, designed and realized by Federico Faggin with his silicon-gate MOS IC technology, along with Ted Hoff, Masatoshi Shima and Stanley Mazor at Intel.
In the early 1970s, MOS IC technology enabled the integration of more than 10,000 transistors on a single chip.
System on a Chip (SoCs) are complete computers on a microchip (or chip) the size of a coin.
They may or may not have integrated RAM and flash memory.
If not integrated, the RAM is usually placed directly above (known as Package on package) or below (on the opposite side of the circuit board) the SoC, and the flash memory is usually placed right next to the SoC.
This is done to improve data transfer speeds, as the data signals do not have to travel long distances.
Since ENIAC in 1945, computers have advanced enormously, with modern SoCs (such as the Snapdragon 865) being the size of a coin while also being hundreds of thousands of times more powerful than ENIAC, integrating billions of transistors, and consuming only a few watts of power.
The first mobile computers were heavy and ran from mains power.
The 50 lb (23 kg) IBM 5100 was an early example.
Later portables such as the Osborne 1 and Compaq Portable were considerably lighter but still needed to be plugged in.
The first laptops, such as the Grid Compass, removed this requirement by incorporating batteries – and with the continued miniaturization of computing resources and advancements in portable battery life, portable computers grew in popularity in the 2000s.
The same developments allowed manufacturers to integrate computing resources into cellular mobile phones by the early 2000s.
These smartphones and tablets run on a variety of operating systems and recently became the dominant computing device on the market.
These are powered by System on a Chip (SoCs), which are complete computers on a microchip the size of a coin.
A computer does not need to be electronic, nor even have a processor, nor RAM, nor even a hard disk.
While popular usage of the word "computer" is synonymous with a personal electronic computer, a typical modern definition of a computer is: "A device that computes, especially a programmable [usually] electronic machine that performs high-speed mathematical or logical operations or that assembles, stores, correlates, or otherwise processes information.
The term hardware covers all tangible physical parts of a computer.
Circuits, computer chips, graphic cards, sound cards, memory (RAM), motherboard, displays, power supplies, cables, keyboards, printers and computer mice are all hardware.
A general-purpose computer has four main components: the arithmetic logic unit (ALU), the control unit, the memory, and the input and output devices (collectively termed I/O).
These parts are interconnected by buses, often made of groups of wires.
Inside each of these parts are thousands to trillions of small electrical circuits which can be turned off or on by means of an electronic switch.
Each circuit represents a bit (binary digit) of information so that when the circuit is on it represents a "1", and when off it represents a "0" (in positive logic representation).
The circuits are arranged in logic gates so that one or more of the circuits may control the state of one or more of the other circuits.
Input devices are the means by which the operations of a computer are controlled and it is provided with data.
Output devices are the means by which a computer provides the results of its calculations in a human-accessible form.
The control unit (often called a control system or central controller) manages the computer's various components; it reads and interprets (decodes) the program instructions, transforming them into control signals that activate other parts of the computer.
Control systems in advanced computers may change the order of execution of some instructions to improve performance.
A key component common to all CPUs is the program counter, a special memory cell (a register) that keeps track of which location in memory the next instruction is to be read from.
Read the code for the next instruction from the cell indicated by the program counter.
Decode the numerical code for the instruction into a set of commands or signals for each of the other systems.
Increment the program counter so it points to the next instruction.
Read whatever data the instruction requires from cells in memory (or perhaps from an input device).
The location of this required data is typically stored within the instruction code.
Provide the necessary data to an ALU or register.
If the instruction requires an ALU or specialized hardware to complete, instruct the hardware to perform the requested operation.
Write the result from the ALU back to a memory location or to a register or perhaps an output device.
Jump back to step (1).
Conceptually, as the program counter is simply another set of memory cells, it can be changed by calculations done in the ALU.
Adding 100 to the program counter would cause the next instruction to be read from a place 100 locations further down the program.
Instructions that modify the program counter are often known as "jumps" and allow for loops (instructions that are repeated by the computer) and often conditional instruction execution (both examples of control flow).
The sequence of operations that the control unit goes through to process an instruction is in itself akin to a short computer program, and indeed, in some more complex CPU designs, there is another yet smaller computer called a microsequencer, which runs a microcode program that causes all of these events to happen.
The control unit, ALU, and registers are collectively known as a central processing unit (CPU).
Early CPUs were composed of many separate components.
Since the 1970s, CPUs have typically been constructed on a single MOS integrated circuit chip called a microprocessor.
The ALU is capable of performing two classes of operations: arithmetic and logic.
The set of arithmetic operations that a particular ALU supports may be limited to addition and subtraction, or might include multiplication, division, trigonometry functions such as sine, cosine, etc.
Some can operate only on whole numbers (integers) while others use floating point to represent real numbers, albeit with limited precision.
However, any computer that is capable of performing just the simplest operations can be programmed to break down the more complex operations into simple steps that it can perform.
Therefore, any computer can be programmed to perform any arithmetic operation—although it will take more time to do so if its ALU does not directly support the operation.
An ALU may also compare numbers and return Boolean truth values (true or false) depending on whether one is equal to, greater than or less than the other ("is 64 greater than 65?
Logic operations involve Boolean logic: AND, OR, XOR, and NOT.
These can be useful for creating complicated conditional statements and processing Boolean logic.
Superscalar computers may contain multiple ALUs, allowing them to process several instructions simultaneously.
Graphics processors and computers with SIMD and MIMD features often contain ALUs that can perform arithmetic on vectors and matrices.
A computer's memory can be viewed as a list of cells into which numbers can be placed or read.
Each cell has a numbered "address" and can store a single number.
The computer can be instructed to "put the number 123 into the cell numbered 1357" or to "add the number that is in cell 1357 to the number that is in cell 2468 and put the answer into cell 1595.
Letters, numbers, even computer instructions can be placed into memory with equal ease.
Since the CPU does not differentiate between different types of information, it is the software's responsibility to give significance to what the memory sees as nothing but a series of numbers.
In almost all modern computers, each memory cell is set up to store binary numbers in groups of eight bits (called a byte).
Each byte is able to represent 256 different numbers (28 = 256); either from 0 to 255 or −128 to +127.
To store larger numbers, several consecutive bytes may be used (typically, two, four or eight).
When negative numbers are required, they are usually stored in two's complement notation.
Other arrangements are possible, but are usually not seen outside of specialized applications or historical contexts.
A computer can store any kind of information in memory if it can be represented numerically.
Modern computers have billions or even trillions of bytes of memory.
The CPU contains a special set of memory cells called registers that can be read and written to much more rapidly than the main memory area.
There are typically between two and one hundred registers depending on the type of CPU.
Registers are used for the most frequently needed data items to avoid having to access main memory every time data is needed.
As data is constantly being worked on, reducing the need to access main memory (which is often slow compared to the ALU and control units) greatly increases the computer's speed.
RAM can be read and written to anytime the CPU commands it, but ROM is preloaded with data and software that never changes, therefore the CPU can only read from it.
ROM is typically used to store the computer's initial start-up instructions.
In general, the contents of RAM are erased when the power to the computer is turned off, but ROM retains its data indefinitely.
In a PC, the ROM contains a specialized program called the BIOS that orchestrates loading the computer's operating system from the hard disk drive into RAM whenever the computer is turned on or reset.
In embedded computers, which frequently do not have disk drives, all of the required software may be stored in ROM.
Software stored in ROM is often called firmware, because it is notionally more like hardware than software.
Flash memory blurs the distinction between ROM and RAM, as it retains its data when turned off but is also rewritable.
It is typically much slower than conventional ROM and RAM however, so its use is restricted to applications where high speed is unnecessary.
In more sophisticated computers there may be one or more RAM cache memories, which are slower than registers but faster than main memory.
Generally computers with this sort of cache are designed to move frequently needed data into the cache automatically, often without the need for any intervention on the programmer's part.
I/O is the means by which a computer exchanges information with the outside world.
Devices that provide input or output to the computer are called peripherals.
On a typical personal computer, peripherals include input devices like the keyboard and mouse, and output devices such as the display and printer.
Hard disk drives, floppy disk drives and optical disc drives serve as both input and output devices.
Computer networking is another form of I/O.
I/O devices are often complex computers in their own right, with their own CPU and memory.
A graphics processing unit might contain fifty or more tiny computers that perform the calculations necessary to display 3D graphics.
Modern desktop computers contain many smaller computers that assist the main CPU in performing I/O.
A 2016-era flat screen display contains its own computer circuitry.
While a computer may be viewed as running one gigantic program stored in its main memory, in some systems it is necessary to give the appearance of running several programs simultaneously.
This is achieved by multitasking, i.
One way of doing this is with a special signal called an interrupt, which can periodically cause the computer to stop executing instructions where it was and do something else instead.
By remembering where it was executing prior to the interrupt, the computer can return to that task later.
If several programs are running "at the same time", then the interrupt generator might be causing several hundred interrupts per second, causing a program switch each time.
Since modern computers typically execute instructions several orders of magnitude faster than human perception, it may appear that many programs are running at the same time, even though only one is ever executing in any given instant.
This method of multitasking is sometimes termed "time-sharing" since each program is allocated a "slice" of time in turn.
Before the era of inexpensive computers, the principal use for multitasking was to allow many people to share the same computer.
Seemingly, multitasking would cause a computer that is switching between several programs to run more slowly, in direct proportion to the number of programs it is running, but most programs spend much of their time waiting for slow input/output devices to complete their tasks.
If a program is waiting for the user to click on the mouse or press a key on the keyboard, then it will not take a "time slice" until the event it is waiting for has occurred.
This frees up time for other programs to execute so that many programs may be run simultaneously without unacceptable speed loss.
Some computers are designed to distribute their work across several CPUs in a multiprocessing configuration, a technique once employed in only large and powerful machines such as supercomputers, mainframe computers and servers.
Multiprocessor and multi-core (multiple CPUs on a single integrated circuit) personal and laptop computers are now widely available, and are being increasingly used in lower-end markets as a result.
Supercomputers in particular often have highly unique architectures that differ significantly from the basic stored-program architecture and from general-purpose computers.
They often feature thousands of CPUs, customized high-speed interconnects, and specialized computing hardware.
Such designs tend to be useful for only specialized tasks due to the large scale of program organization required to use most of the available resources at once.
Supercomputers usually see usage in large-scale simulation, graphics rendering, and cryptography applications, as well as with other so-called "embarrassingly parallel" tasks.
Software consists of the encoded information that determines a computer's operation, such as data or instructions on how to process the data.
In contrast to the physical hardware from which the system is built, software is immaterial.
Software includes computer programs, libraries and related non-executable data, such as online documentation or digital media.
It is often divided into system software and application software.
Both software and hardware are key parts of a modern computer.
Firmware is a subset of software that is used to control physical hardware, such as with BIOS ROM in an IBM PC compatible computer.
The defining feature of modern computers which distinguishes them from all other machines is that they can be programmed.
Some type of instructions (the program) can be given to the computer, and it will process them.
Modern computers based on the von Neumann architecture often have machine code in the form of an imperative programming language.
In practical terms, a computer program may be just a few instructions or extend to many millions of instructions, as do the programs for word processors and web browsers for example.
A typical modern computer can execute billions of instructions per second (gigaflops) and rarely makes a mistake over many years of operation.
Large computer programs consisting of several million instructions may take teams of programmers years to write, and due to the complexity of the task almost certainly contain errors.
This section applies to most common RAM machine–based computers.
In most cases, computer instructions are simple: add one number to another, move some data from one location to another, send a message to some external device, etc.
These instructions are read from the computer's memory and are generally carried out (executed) in the order they were given.
However, there are usually specialized instructions to tell the computer to jump ahead or backwards to some other place in the program and to carry on executing from there.
These are called "jump" instructions (or branches).
Furthermore, jump instructions may be made to happen conditionally so that different sequences of instructions may be used depending on the result of some previous calculation or some external event.
Many computers directly support subroutines by providing a type of jump that "remembers" the location it jumped from and another instruction to return to the instruction following that jump instruction.
Program execution might be likened to reading a book.
While a person will normally read each word and line in sequence, they may at times jump back to an earlier place in the text or skip sections that are not of interest.
Similarly, a computer may sometimes go back and repeat the instructions in some section of the program over and over again until some internal condition is met.
This is called the flow of control within the program and it is what allows the computer to perform tasks repeatedly without human intervention.
Comparatively, a person using a pocket calculator can perform a basic arithmetic operation such as adding two numbers with just a few button presses.
But to add together all of the numbers from 1 to 1,000 would take thousands of button presses and a lot of time, with a near certainty of making a mistake.
On the other hand, a computer may be programmed to do this with just a few simple instructions.
Once told to run this program, the computer will perform the repetitive addition task without further human intervention.
It will almost never make a mistake and a modern PC can complete the task in a fraction of a second.
In most computers, individual instructions are stored as machine code with each instruction being given a unique number (its operation code or opcode for short).
The command to add two numbers together would have one opcode; the command to multiply them would have a different opcode, and so on.
The simplest computers are able to perform any of a handful of different instructions; the more complex computers have several hundred to choose from, each with a unique numerical code.
Since the computer's memory is able to store numbers, it can also store the instruction codes.
This leads to the important fact that entire programs (which are just lists of these instructions) can be represented as lists of numbers and can themselves be manipulated inside the computer in the same way as numeric data.
The fundamental concept of storing programs in the computer's memory alongside the data they operate on is the crux of the von Neumann, or stored program, architecture.
In some cases, a computer might store some or all of its program in memory that is kept separate from the data it operates on.
This is called the Harvard architecture after the Harvard Mark I computer.
Modern von Neumann computers display some traits of the Harvard architecture in their designs, such as in CPU caches.
While it is possible to write computer programs as long lists of numbers (machine language) and while this technique was used with many early computers, it is extremely tedious and potentially error-prone to do so in practice, especially for complicated programs.
Instead, each basic instruction can be given a short name that is indicative of its function and easy to remember – a mnemonic such as ADD, SUB, MULT or JUMP.
These mnemonics are collectively known as a computer's assembly language.
Converting programs written in assembly language into something the computer can actually understand (machine language) is usually done by a computer program called an assembler.
A programming language is a notation system for writing the source code from which a computer program is produced.
Programming languages provide various ways of specifying programs for computers to run.
Unlike natural languages, programming languages are designed to permit no ambiguity and to be concise.
They are purely written languages and are often difficult to read aloud.
They are generally either translated into machine code by a compiler or an assembler before being run, or translated directly at run time by an interpreter.
Sometimes programs are executed by a hybrid method of the two techniques.
There are thousands of programming languages—some intended for general purpose programming, others useful for only highly specialized applications.
Program design of small programs is relatively simple and involves the analysis of the problem, collection of inputs, using the programming constructs within languages, devising or using established procedures and algorithms, providing data for output devices and solutions to the problem as applicable.
As problems become larger and more complex, features such as subprograms, modules, formal documentation, and new paradigms such as object-oriented programming are encountered.
Large programs involving thousands of line of code and more require formal software methodologies.
The task of developing large software systems presents a significant intellectual challenge.
Producing software with an acceptably high reliability within a predictable schedule and budget has historically been difficult; the academic and professional discipline of software engineering concentrates specifically on this challenge.
Errors in computer programs are called "bugs".
They may be benign and not affect the usefulness of the program, or have only subtle effects.
However, in some cases they may cause the program or the entire system to "hang", becoming unresponsive to input such as mouse clicks or keystrokes, to completely fail, or to crash.
Otherwise benign bugs may sometimes be harnessed for malicious intent by an unscrupulous user writing an exploit, code designed to take advantage of a bug and disrupt a computer's proper execution.
Bugs are usually not the fault of the computer.
Since computers merely execute the instructions they are given, bugs are nearly always the result of programmer error or an oversight made in the program's design.
Admiral Grace Hopper, an American computer scientist and developer of the first compiler, is credited for having first used the term "bugs" in computing after a dead moth was found shorting a relay in the Harvard Mark II computer in September 1947.
Computers have been used to coordinate information between multiple physical locations since the 1950s.
In the 1970s, computer engineers at research institutions throughout the United States began to link their computers together using telecommunications technology.
The effort was funded by ARPA (now DARPA), and the computer network that resulted was called the ARPANET.
Logic gates are a common abstraction which can apply to most of the above digital or analog paradigms.
The ability to store and execute lists of instructions called programs makes computers extremely versatile, distinguishing them from calculators.
The Church–Turing thesis is a mathematical statement of this versatility: any computer with a minimum capability (being Turing-complete) is, in principle, capable of performing the same tasks that any other computer can perform.
Therefore, any type of computer (netbook, supercomputer, cellular automaton, etc.
In the 20th century, artificial intelligence systems were predominantly symbolic: they executed code that was explicitly programmed by software developers.
Machine learning models, however, have a set parameters that are adjusted throughout training, so that the model learns to accomplish a task based on the provided data.
The efficiency of machine learning (and in particular of neural networks) has rapidly improved with progress in hardware for parallel computing, mainly graphics processing units (GPUs).
Some large language models are able to control computers or robots.
AI progress may lead to the creation of artificial general intelligence (AGI), a type of AI that could accomplish virtually any intellectual task at least as well as humans.
As the use of computers has spread throughout society, there are an increasing number of careers involving computers.
The need for computers to work well together and to be able to exchange information has spawned the need for many standards organizations, clubs and societies of both a formal and informal nature.
The Internet (or internet) is the global system of interconnected computer networks that uses the Internet protocol suite (TCP/IP) to communicate between networks and devices.
It is a network of networks that comprises private, public, academic, business, and government networks of local to global scope, linked by electronic, wireless, and optical networking technologies.
The Internet carries a vast range of information services and resources, such as the interlinked hypertext documents and applications of the World Wide Web (WWW), electronic mail, discussion groups, internet telephony, streaming media and file sharing.
Most traditional communication media, including telephone, radio, television, paper mail, newspapers, and print publishing, have been transformed by the Internet, giving rise to new media such as email, online music, digital newspapers, news aggregators, and audio and video streaming websites.
The Internet has enabled and accelerated new forms of personal interaction through instant messaging, Internet forums, and social networking services.
Online shopping has also grown to occupy a significant market across industries, enabling firms to extend brick and mortar presences to serve larger markets.
Business-to-business and financial services on the Internet affect supply chains across entire industries.
The origins of the Internet date back to research that enabled the time-sharing of computer resources, the development of packet switching, and the design of computer networks for data communication.
The set of communication protocols to enable internetworking on the Internet arose from research and development commissioned in the 1970s by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) of the United States Department of Defense in collaboration with universities and researchers across the United States, United Kingdom and France.
The Internet has no single centralized governance in either technological implementation or policies for access and usage.
Each constituent network sets its own policies.
The overarching definitions of the two principal name spaces on the Internet, the Internet Protocol address (IP address) space and the Domain Name System (DNS), are directed by a maintainer organization, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN).
The technical underpinning and standardization of the core protocols is an activity of the non-profit Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).
The word internetted was used as early as 1849, meaning interconnected or interwoven.
The word Internet was used in 1945 by the United States War Department in a radio operator's manual, and in 1974 as the shorthand form of Internetwork.
Today, the term Internet most commonly refers to the global system of interconnected computer networks, though it may also refer to any group of smaller networks.
The word Internet may be capitalized as a proper noun, although this is becoming less common.
This reflects the tendency in English to capitalize new terms and move them to lowercase as they become familiar.
The word is sometimes still capitalized to distinguish the global internet from smaller networks, though many publications, including the AP Stylebook since 2016, recommend the lowercase form in every case.
In 2016, the Oxford English Dictionary found that, based on a study of around 2.
The terms Internet and World Wide Web are often used interchangeably; it is common to speak of "going on the Internet" when using a web browser to view web pages.
However, the World Wide Web, or the Web, is only one of a large number of Internet services.
It is the global collection of web pages, documents and other web resources linked by hyperlinks and URLs.
In the 1960s, computer scientists began developing systems for time-sharing of computer resources.
Licklider proposed the idea of a universal network while working at Bolt Beranek & Newman and, later, leading the Information Processing Techniques Office at the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) of the United States Department of Defense.
Research into packet switching, one of the fundamental Internet technologies, started in the work of Paul Baran at RAND in the early 1960s and, independently, Donald Davies at the United Kingdom's National Physical Laboratory in 1965.
After the Symposium on Operating Systems Principles in 1967, packet switching from the proposed NPL network was incorporated into the design of the ARPANET, an experimental resource sharing network proposed by ARPA.
ARPANET development began with two network nodes which were interconnected between the University of California, Los Angeles and the Stanford Research Institute on 29 October 1969.
The third site was at the University of California, Santa Barbara, followed by the University of Utah.
By the end of 1971, 15 sites were connected to the young ARPANET.
Thereafter, the ARPANET gradually developed into a decentralized communications network, connecting remote centers and military bases in the United States.
Other user networks and research networks, such as the Merit Network and CYCLADES, were developed in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
Early international collaborations for the ARPANET were rare.
Connections were made in 1973 to Norway (NORSAR and, later, NDRE) and to Peter Kirstein's research group at University College London, which provided a gateway to British academic networks, the first internetwork for resource sharing.
ARPA projects, the International Network Working Group and commercial initiatives led to the development of various protocols and standards by which multiple separate networks could become a single network, or a network of networks.
In 1974, Vint Cerf at Stanford University and Bob Kahn at DARPA published a proposal for "A Protocol for Packet Network Intercommunication".
Cerf and his graduate students used the term internet as a shorthand for internetwork in RFC 675.
The Internet Experiment Notes and later RFCs repeated this use.
The work of Louis Pouzin and Robert Metcalfe had important influences on the resulting TCP/IP design.
National PTTs and commercial providers developed the X.
The ARPANET initially served as a backbone for the interconnection of regional academic and military networks in the United States to enable resource sharing.
Access to the ARPANET was expanded in 1981 when the National Science Foundation (NSF) funded the Computer Science Network (CSNET).
In 1982, the Internet Protocol Suite (TCP/IP) was standardized, which facilitated worldwide proliferation of interconnected networks.
TCP/IP network access expanded again in 1986 when the National Science Foundation Network (NSFNet) provided access to supercomputer sites in the United States for researchers, first at speeds of 56 kbit/s and later at 1.
The NSFNet expanded into academic and research organizations in Europe, Australia, New Zealand and Japan in 1988–89.
Although other network protocols such as UUCP and PTT public data networks had global reach well before this time, this marked the beginning of the Internet as an intercontinental network.
Commercial Internet service providers emerged in 1989 in the United States and Australia.
The ARPANET was decommissioned in 1990.
The linking of commercial networks and enterprises by the early 1990s, as well as the advent of the World Wide Web, marked the beginning of the transition to the modern Internet.
Steady advances in semiconductor technology and optical networking created new economic opportunities for commercial involvement in the expansion of the network in its core and for delivering services to the public.
In mid-1989, MCI Mail and Compuserve established connections to the Internet, delivering email and public access products to the half million users of the Internet.
Just months later, on 1 January 1990, PSInet launched an alternate Internet backbone for commercial use; one of the networks that added to the core of the commercial Internet of later years.
In March 1990, the first high-speed T1 (1.
Later in 1990, Tim Berners-Lee began writing WorldWideWeb, the first web browser, after two years of lobbying CERN management.
By Christmas 1990, Berners-Lee had built all the tools necessary for a working Web: the HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) 0.
In 1991 the Commercial Internet eXchange was founded, allowing PSInet to communicate with the other commercial networks CERFnet and Alternet.
Stanford Federal Credit Union was the first financial institution to offer online Internet banking services to all of its members in October 1994.
In 1996, OP Financial Group, also a cooperative bank, became the second online bank in the world and the first in Europe.
By 1995, the Internet was fully commercialized in the U.
As technology advanced and commercial opportunities fueled reciprocal growth, the volume of Internet traffic started experiencing similar characteristics as that of the scaling of MOS transistors, exemplified by Moore's law, doubling every 18 months.
This growth, formalized as Edholm's law, was catalyzed by advances in MOS technology, laser light wave systems, and noise performance.
Since 1995, the Internet has tremendously impacted culture and commerce, including the rise of near-instant communication by email, instant messaging, telephony (Voice over Internet Protocol or VoIP), two-way interactive video calls, and the World Wide Web.
Increasing amounts of data are transmitted at higher and higher speeds over fiber optic networks operating at 1 Gbit/s, 10 Gbit/s, or more.
The Internet continues to grow, driven by ever-greater amounts of online information and knowledge, commerce, entertainment and social networking services.
During the late 1990s, it was estimated that traffic on the public Internet grew by 100 percent per year, while the mean annual growth in the number of Internet users was thought to be between 20% and 50%.
This growth is often attributed to the lack of central administration, which allows organic growth of the network, as well as the non-proprietary nature of the Internet protocols, which encourages vendor interoperability and prevents any one company from exerting too much control over the network.
In November 2006, the Internet was included on USA Today's list of the New Seven Wonders.
As of 31 March 2011, the estimated total number of Internet users was 2.
It is estimated that in 1993 the Internet carried only 1% of the information flowing through two-way telecommunication.
By 2000 this figure had grown to 51%, and by 2007 more than 97% of all telecommunicated information was carried over the Internet.
Modern smartphones can access the Internet through cellular carrier networks, and internet usage by mobile and tablet devices exceeded desktop worldwide for the first time in October 2016.
As of 2018, 80% of the world's population were covered by a 4G network.
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) estimated that, by the end of 2017, 48% of individual users regularly connect to the Internet, up from 34% in 2012.
Mobile Internet connectivity has played an important role in expanding access in recent years, especially in Asia and the Pacific and in Africa.
The number of unique mobile cellular subscriptions increased from 3.
The limits that users face on accessing information via mobile applications coincide with a broader process of fragmentation of the Internet.
Fragmentation restricts access to media content and tends to affect the poorest users the most.
One solution, zero-rating, is the practice of Internet service providers allowing users free connectivity to access specific content or applications without cost.
The Internet has enabled new forms of social interaction, activities, and social associations, giving rise to the scholarly study of the sociology of the Internet.
Between 2000 and 2009, the number of Internet users globally rose from 390 million to 1.
By 2010, 22% of the world's population had access to computers with 1 billion Google searches every day, 300 million Internet users reading blogs, and 2 billion videos viewed daily on YouTube.
In 2014 the world's Internet users surpassed 3 billion or 44 percent of world population, but two-thirds came from the richest countries, with 78 percent of Europeans using the Internet, followed by 57 percent of the Americas.
However, by 2018, Asia alone accounted for 51% of all Internet users, with 2.
China's Internet users surpassed a major milestone in 2018, when the country's Internet regulatory authority, China Internet Network Information Centre, announced that China had 802 million users.
China was followed by India, with some 700 million users, with the United States third with 275 million users.
However, in terms of penetration, in 2022, China had a 70% penetration rate compared to India's 60% and the United States's 90%.
In 2022, 54% of the world's Internet users were based in Asia, 14% in Europe, 7% in North America, 10% in Latin America and the Caribbean, 11% in Africa, 4% in the Middle East and 1% in Oceania.
In 2019, Kuwait, Qatar, the Falkland Islands, Bermuda and Iceland had the highest Internet penetration by the number of users, with 93% or more of the population with access.
As of 2025, the International Telecommunication Union estimated that 6 billion people, or 74% of the world's population, used the Internet, while 2.
Early computer systems were limited to the characters in the American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII), a subset of the Latin alphabet.
After English (27%), the most requested languages on the World Wide Web are Chinese (25%), Spanish (8%), Japanese (5%), Portuguese and German (4% each), Arabic, French and Russian (3% each), and Korean (2%).
Modern character encoding standards, such as Unicode, allow for development and communication in the world's widely used languages.
However, some glitches such as mojibake (incorrect display of some languages' characters) still remain.
Several neologisms exist that refer to Internet users: Netizen (as in "citizen of the net") refers to those actively involved in improving online communities, the Internet in general or surrounding political affairs and rights such as free speech, Internaut refers to operators or technically highly capable users of the Internet, digital citizen refers to a person using the Internet in order to engage in society, politics, and government participation.
The Internet allows greater flexibility in working hours and location, especially with the spread of unmetered high-speed connections.
The Internet can be accessed almost anywhere by numerous means, including through mobile Internet devices.
Mobile phones, datacards, handheld game consoles and cellular routers allow users to connect to the Internet wirelessly.
Educational material at all levels from pre-school (e.
CBeebies) to post-doctoral (e.
The internet has facilitated the development of virtual universities and distance education, enabling both formal and informal education.
The Internet allows researchers to conduct research remotely via virtual laboratories, with profound changes in reach and generalizability of findings as well as in communication between scientists and in the publication of results.
By the late 2010s the Internet had been described as "the main source of scientific information "for the majority of the global North population".
Wikis have also been used in the academic community for sharing and dissemination of information across institutional and international boundaries.
In those settings, they have been found useful for collaboration on grant writing, strategic planning, departmental documentation, and committee work.
The United States Patent and Trademark Office uses a wiki to allow the public to collaborate on finding prior art relevant to examination of pending patent applications.
Queens, New York has used a wiki to allow citizens to collaborate on the design and planning of a local park.
The English Wikipedia has the largest user base among wikis on the World Wide Web and ranks in the top 10 among all sites in terms of traffic.
The Internet has been a major outlet for leisure activity since its inception, with entertaining social experiments such as MUDs and MOOs being conducted on university servers, and humor-related Usenet groups receiving much traffic.
Many Internet forums have sections devoted to games and funny videos.
Another area of leisure activity on the Internet is multiplayer gaming.
This form of recreation creates communities, where people of all ages and origins enjoy the fast-paced world of multiplayer games.
These range from MMORPG to first-person shooters, from role-playing video games to online gambling.
While online gaming has been around since the 1970s, modern modes of online gaming began with subscription services such as GameSpy and MPlayer.
Streaming media is the real-time delivery of digital media for immediate consumption or enjoyment by end users.
Streaming companies (such as Netflix, Disney+, Amazon's Prime Video, Mubi, Hulu, and Apple TV+) now dominate the entertainment industry, eclipsing traditional broadcasters.
Audio streamers such as Spotify and Apple Music also have significant market share in the audio entertainment market.
Video sharing websites are also a major factor in the entertainment ecosystem.
YouTube was founded on 15 February 2005 and is now the leading website for free streaming video with more than two billion users.
It uses a web player to stream and show video files.
YouTube users watch hundreds of millions, and upload hundreds of thousands, of videos daily.
Other video sharing websites include Vimeo, Instagram and TikTok.
Although many governments have attempted to restrict both Internet pornography and online gambling, this has generally failed to stop their widespread popularity.
A number of advertising-funded ostensible video sharing websites known as "tube sites" have been created to host shared pornographic video content.
Due to laws requiring the documentation of the origin of pornography, these websites now largely operate in conjunction with pornographic movie studios and their own independent creator networks, acting as de-facto video streaming services.
Major players in this field include the market leader Aylo, the operator of PornHub and numerous other branded sites, as well as other independent operators such as xHamster and Xvideos.
As of 2023, Internet traffic to pornographic video sites rivalled that of mainstream video streaming and sharing services.
Remote work is facilitated by tools such as groupware, virtual private networks, conference calling, videotelephony, and VoIP so that work may be performed from any location, such as the worker's home.
The spread of low-cost Internet access in developing countries has opened up new possibilities for peer-to-peer charities, which allow individuals to contribute small amounts to charitable projects for other individuals.
Websites, such as DonorsChoose and GlobalGiving, allow small-scale donors to direct funds to individual projects of their choice.
A popular twist on Internet-based philanthropy is the use of peer-to-peer lending for charitable purposes.
Kiva pioneered this concept in 2005, offering the first web-based service to publish individual loan profiles for funding.
The low cost and nearly instantaneous sharing of ideas, knowledge, and skills have made collaborative work dramatically easier, with the help of collaborative software, which allow groups to easily form, cheaply communicate, and share ideas.
An example of collaborative software is the free software movement, which has produced, among other things, Linux, Mozilla Firefox, and OpenOffice.
Content management systems allow collaborating teams to work on shared sets of documents simultaneously without accidentally destroying each other's work.
The internet also allows for cloud computing, virtual private networks, remote desktops, and remote work.
The online disinhibition effect describes the tendency of many individuals to behave more stridently or offensively online than they would in person.
A significant number of feminist women have been the target of various forms of harassment, including insults and hate speech, to, in extreme cases, rape and death threats, in response to posts they have made on social media.
Social media companies have been criticized in the past for not doing enough to aid victims of online abuse.
Children also face dangers online such as cyberbullying and approaches by sexual predators, who sometimes pose as children themselves.
Due to naivety, they may also post personal information about themselves online, which could put them or their families at risk unless warned not to do so.
Many parents choose to enable Internet filtering or supervise their children's online activities in an attempt to protect their children from pornography or violent content on the Internet.
The most popular social networking services commonly forbid users under the age of 13.
However, these policies can be circumvented by registering an account with a false birth date, and a significant number of children aged under 13 join such sites.
Social networking services for younger children, which claim to provide better levels of protection for children, also exist.
Internet usage has been correlated to users' loneliness.
Lonely people tend to use the Internet as an outlet for their feelings and to share their stories with others, such as in the "I am lonely will anyone speak to me" thread.
Cyberslacking can become a drain on corporate resources; employees spend a significant amount of time surfing the Web while at work.
Internet addiction disorder is excessive computer use that interferes with daily life.
Carr believes that Internet use has other effects on individuals, for instance improving skills of scan-reading and interfering with the deep thinking that leads to true creativity.
Electronic business encompasses business processes spanning the entire value chain: purchasing, supply chain management, marketing, sales, customer service, and business relationship.
E-commerce seeks to add revenue streams using the Internet to build and enhance relationships with clients and partners.
According to International Data Corporation, the size of worldwide e-commerce, when global business-to-business and -consumer transactions are combined, equate to $16 trillion in 2013.
A report by Oxford Economics added those two together to estimate the total size of the digital economy at $20.
While much has been written of the economic advantages of Internet-enabled commerce, there is also evidence that some aspects of the Internet such as maps and location-aware services may serve to reinforce economic inequality and the digital divide.
Electronic commerce may be responsible for consolidation and the decline of mom-and-pop, brick and mortar businesses resulting in increases in income inequality.
A 2013 Institute for Local Self-Reliance report states that brick-and-mortar retailers employ 47 people for every $10 million in sales, while Amazon employs only 14.
Similarly, the 700-employee room rental start-up Airbnb was valued at $10 billion in 2014, about half as much as Hilton Worldwide, which employs 152,000 people.
At that time, Uber employed 1,000 full-time employees and was valued at $18.
Advertising on popular web pages can be lucrative, and e-commerce.
Online advertising is a form of marketing and advertising which uses the Internet to deliver promotional marketing messages to consumers.
It includes email marketing, search engine marketing (SEM), social media marketing, many types of display advertising (including web banner advertising), and mobile advertising.
In 2011, Internet advertising revenues in the United States surpassed those of cable television and nearly exceeded those of broadcast television.
Many common online advertising practices are controversial and increasingly subject to regulation.
The Internet has achieved new relevance as a political tool.
The presidential campaign of Howard Dean in 2004 in the United States was notable for its success in soliciting donation via the Internet.
Many political groups use the Internet to achieve a new method of organizing for carrying out their mission, having given rise to Internet activism.
Social media websites, such as Facebook and Twitter, helped people organize the Arab Spring, by helping activists organize protests, communicate grievances, and disseminate information.
Many have understood the Internet as an extension of the Habermasian notion of the public sphere, observing how network communication technologies provide something like a global civic forum.
However, incidents of politically motivated Internet censorship have now been recorded in many countries, including western democracies.
E-government is the use of technological communications devices, such as the Internet, to provide public services to citizens and other persons in a country or region.
E-government offers opportunities for more direct and convenient citizen access to government and for government provision of services directly to citizens.
Cybersectarianism is a new organizational form that involves:highly dispersed small groups of practitioners that may remain largely anonymous within the larger social context and operate in relative secrecy, while still linked remotely to a larger network of believers who share a set of practices and texts, and often a common devotion to a particular leader.
Overseas supporters provide funding and support; domestic practitioners distribute tracts, participate in acts of resistance, and share information on the internal situation with outsiders.
Collectively, members and practitioners of such sects construct viable virtual communities of faith, exchanging personal testimonies and engaging in the collective study via email, online chat rooms, and web-based message boards.
In particular, the British government has raised concerns about the prospect of young British Muslims being indoctrinated into Islamic extremism by material on the Internet, being persuaded to join terrorist groups such as the so-called "Islamic State", and then potentially committing acts of terrorism on returning to Britain after fighting in Syria or Iraq.
The Internet carries many applications and services, most prominently the World Wide Web, including social media, electronic mail, mobile applications, multiplayer online games, Internet telephony, file sharing, and streaming media services.
The World Wide Web is a global collection of documents, images, multimedia, applications, and other resources, logically interrelated by hyperlinks and referenced with Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs), which provide a global system of named references.
URIs symbolically identify services, web servers, databases, and the documents and resources that they can provide.
HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is the main access protocol of the World Wide Web.
Web services also use HTTP for communication between software systems for information transfer, sharing and exchanging business data and logistics and is one of many languages or protocols that can be used for communication on the Internet.
World Wide Web browser software, such as Microsoft Edge, Mozilla Firefox, Opera, Apple's Safari, and Google Chrome, enable users to navigate from one web page to another via the hyperlinks embedded in the documents.
These documents may also contain computer data, including graphics, sounds, text, video, multimedia and interactive content.
Client-side scripts can include animations, games, office applications and scientific demonstrations.
Email is an important communications service available via the Internet.
The concept of sending electronic text messages between parties, analogous to mailing letters or memos, predates the creation of the Internet.
Internet telephony is a common communications service realized with the Internet.
The name of the principal internetworking protocol, the Internet Protocol, lends its name to voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP).
VoIP systems now dominate many markets, being as easy and convenient as a traditional telephone, while having substantial cost savings, especially over long distances.
File sharing is the practice of transferring large amounts of data in the form of computer files across the Internet, for example via file servers.
The load of bulk downloads to many users can be eased by the use of "mirror" servers or peer-to-peer networks.
Access to the file may be controlled by user authentication, the transit of the file over the Internet may be obscured by encryption, and money may change hands for access to the file.
The price can be paid by the remote charging of funds from, for example, a credit card whose details are also passed—usually fully encrypted—across the Internet.
The origin and authenticity of the file received may be checked by a digital signature.
The Internet is a global network that comprises many voluntarily interconnected autonomous networks.
It operates without a central governing body.
The technical underpinning and standardization of the core protocols (IPv4 and IPv6) is an activity of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), a non-profit organization of loosely affiliated international participants that anyone may associate with by contributing technical expertise.
While the hardware components in the Internet infrastructure can often be used to support other software systems, it is the design and the standardization process of the software that characterizes the Internet and provides the foundation for its scalability and success.
The responsibility for the architectural design of the Internet software systems has been assumed by the IETF.
The IETF conducts standard-setting work groups, open to any individual, about the various aspects of Internet architecture.
The resulting contributions and standards are published as Request for Comments (RFC) documents on the IETF web site.
The principal methods of networking that enable the Internet are contained in specially designated RFCs that constitute the Internet Standards.
Other less rigorous documents are simply informative, experimental, or historical, or document the best current practices when implementing Internet technologies.
To maintain interoperability, the principal name spaces of the Internet are administered by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN).
ICANN is governed by an international board of directors drawn from across the Internet technical, business, academic, and other non-commercial communities.
The organization coordinates the assignment of unique identifiers for use on the Internet, including domain names, IP addresses, application port numbers in the transport protocols, and many other parameters.
Globally unified name spaces are essential for maintaining the global reach of the Internet.
This role of ICANN distinguishes it as perhaps the only central coordinating body for the global Internet.
The National Telecommunications and Information Administration, an agency of the United States Department of Commerce, had final approval over changes to the DNS root zone until the IANA stewardship transition on 1 October 2016.
The Réseaux IP Européens – Network Coordination Centre (RIPE NCC) for Europe, the Middle East, and Central Asia.
The Internet Society (ISOC) was founded in 1992 with a mission to "assure the open development, evolution and use of the Internet for the benefit of all people throughout the world".
Its members include individuals as well as corporations, organizations, governments, and universities.
Among other activities ISOC provides an administrative home for a number of less formally organized groups that are involved in developing and managing the Internet, including: the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), Internet Architecture Board (IAB), Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG), Internet Research Task Force (IRTF), and Internet Research Steering Group (IRSG).
On 16 November 2005, the United Nations-sponsored World Summit on the Information Society in Tunis established the Internet Governance Forum (IGF) to discuss Internet-related issues.
The communications infrastructure of the Internet consists of its hardware components and a system of software layers that control various aspects of the architecture.
As with any computer network, the Internet physically consists of routers, media (such as cabling and radio links), repeaters, and modems.
However, as an example of internetworking, many of the network nodes are not necessarily Internet equipment per se.
Internet packets are carried by other full-fledged networking protocols, with the Internet acting as a homogeneous networking standard, running across heterogeneous hardware, with the packets guided to their destinations by IP routers.
Internet service providers (ISPs) establish worldwide connectivity between individual networks at various levels of scope.
At the top of the routing hierarchy are the tier 1 networks, large telecommunication companies that exchange traffic directly with each other via very high speed fiber-optic cables and governed by peering agreements.
Tier 2 and lower-level networks buy Internet transit from other providers to reach at least some parties on the global Internet, though they may also engage in peering.
End-users who only access the Internet when needed to perform a function or obtain information, represent the bottom of the routing hierarchy.
An ISP may use a single upstream provider for connectivity, or implement multihoming to achieve redundancy and load balancing.
Internet exchange points are major traffic exchanges with physical connections to multiple ISPs.
Large organizations, such as academic institutions, large enterprises, and governments, may perform the same function as ISPs, engaging in peering and purchasing transit on behalf of their internal networks.
Research networks tend to interconnect with large subnetworks such as GEANT, GLORIAD, Internet2, and the UK's national research and education network, JANET.
Common methods of Internet access by users include broadband over coaxial cable, fiber optics or copper wires, Wi-Fi, satellite, and cellular telephone technology.
Grassroots efforts have led to wireless community networks.
Commercial Wi-Fi services that cover large areas are available in many cities, such as New York, London, Vienna, Toronto, San Francisco, Philadelphia, Chicago and Pittsburgh.
Most servers that provide internet services are today hosted in data centers, and content is often accessed through high-performance content delivery networks.
Colocation centers often host private peering connections between their customers, internet transit providers, cloud providers, meet-me rooms for connecting customers together, Internet exchange points, and landing points and terminal equipment for fiber optic submarine communication cables, connecting the internet.
The Internet standards describe a framework known as the Internet protocol suite (also called TCP/IP, based on the first two components.
At the top is the application layer, where communication is described in terms of the objects or data structures most appropriate for each application.
For example, a web browser operates in a client–server application model and exchanges information with the HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) and an application-germane data structure, such as the HyperText Markup Language (HTML).
Below this top layer, the transport layer connects applications on different hosts with a logical channel through the network.
It provides this service with a variety of possible characteristics, such as ordered, reliable delivery (TCP), and an unreliable datagram service (UDP).
Underlying these layers are the networking technologies that interconnect networks at their borders and exchange traffic across them.
The Internet layer implements the Internet Protocol (IP) which enables computers to identify and locate each other by IP address and route their traffic via intermediate transit networks.
The Internet Protocol layer code is independent of the type of network that it is physically running over.
At the bottom of the architecture is the link layer, which connects nodes on the same physical link, and contains protocols that do not require routers for traversal to other links.
The protocol suite does not explicitly specify hardware methods to transfer bits, or protocols to manage such hardware, but assumes that appropriate technology is available.
Examples of that technology include Wi-Fi, Ethernet, and DSL.
The most prominent component of the Internet model is the Internet Protocol.
IP enables internetworking, essentially establishing the Internet itself.
Two versions of the Internet Protocol exist, IPv4 and IPv6.
Aside from the complex array of physical connections that make up its infrastructure, the Internet is facilitated by bi- or multi-lateral commercial contracts (e.
For locating individual computers on the network, the Internet provides IP addresses.
IP addresses are used by the Internet infrastructure to direct internet packets to their destinations.
They consist of fixed-length numbers, which are found within the packet.
IP addresses are generally assigned to equipment either automatically via Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol, or are configured.
Domain Name Systems convert user-inputted domain names (e.
Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) defines an IP address as a 32-bit number.
IPv4 is the initial version used on the first generation of the Internet and is still in dominant use.
It was designed in 1981 to address up to ≈4.
However, the explosive growth of the Internet has led to IPv4 address exhaustion, which entered its final stage in 2011, when the global IPv4 address allocation pool was exhausted.
Because of the growth of the Internet and the depletion of available IPv4 addresses, a new version of IP IPv6, was developed in the mid-1990s, which provides vastly larger addressing capabilities and more efficient routing of Internet traffic.
IPv6 uses 128 bits for the IP address and was standardized in 1998.
IPv6 deployment has been ongoing since the mid-2000s and is currently in growing deployment around the world, since Internet address registries began to urge all resource managers to plan rapid adoption and conversion.
By design, IPv6 is not directly interoperable with IPv4.
Instead, it establishes a parallel version of the Internet not directly accessible with IPv4 software.
Thus, translation facilities exist for internetworking, and some nodes have duplicate networking software for both networks.
Essentially all modern computer operating systems support both versions of the Internet Protocol.
Network infrastructure, however, has been lagging in this development.
A subnet or subnetwork is a logical subdivision of an IP network.
Computers that belong to a subnet are addressed with an identical most-significant bit-group in their IP addresses.
This results in the logical division of an IP address into two fields, the network number or routing prefix and the rest field or host identifier.
The rest field is an identifier for a specific host or network interface.
The routing prefix may be expressed in Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) notation written as the first address of a network, followed by a slash character (/), and ending with the bit-length of the prefix.
Addresses in the range 198.
The IPv6 address specification 2001:db8::/32 is a large address block with 296 addresses, having a 32-bit routing prefix.
For IPv4, a network may also be characterized by its subnet mask or netmask, which is the bitmask that when applied by a bitwise AND operation to any IP address in the network, yields the routing prefix.
Subnet masks are also expressed in dot-decimal notation like an address.
Computers and routers use routing tables in their operating system to forward IP packets to reach a node on a different subnetwork.
Routing tables are maintained by manual configuration or automatically by routing protocols.
End-nodes typically use a default route that points toward an ISP providing transit, while ISP routers use the Border Gateway Protocol to establish the most efficient routing across the complex connections of the global Internet.
The default gateway is the node that serves as the forwarding host (router) to other networks when no other route specification matches the destination IP address of a packet.
Internet resources, hardware, and software components are the target of criminal or malicious attempts to gain unauthorized control to cause interruptions, commit fraud, engage in blackmail or access private information.
Malware is malicious software used and distributed via the Internet.
It includes computer viruses which are copied with the help of humans, computer worms which copy themselves automatically, software for denial of service attacks, ransomware, botnets, and spyware that reports on the activity and typing of users.
Usually, these activities constitute cybercrime.
Defense theorists have also speculated about the possibilities of hackers using cyber warfare using similar methods on a large scale.
Malware poses serious problems to individuals and businesses on the Internet.
According to Symantec's 2018 Internet Security Threat Report (ISTR), malware variants number has increased to 669,947,865 in 2017, which is twice as many malware variants as in 2016.
Cybercrime, which includes malware attacks as well as other crimes committed by computer, was predicted to cost the world economy US$6 trillion in 2021, and is increasing at a rate of 15% per year.
Since 2021, malware has been designed to target computer systems that run critical infrastructure such as the electricity distribution network.
Malware can be designed to evade antivirus software detection algorithms.
The vast majority of computer surveillance involves the monitoring of data and traffic on the Internet.
In the United States for example, under the Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act, all phone calls and broadband Internet traffic (emails, web traffic, instant messaging, etc.
Under the Act, all U.
The large amount of data gathered from packet capture requires surveillance software that filters and reports relevant information, such as the use of certain words or phrases, the access to certain types of web sites, or communicating via email or chat with certain parties.
Agencies, such as the Information Awareness Office, NSA, GCHQ and the FBI, spend billions of dollars per year to develop, purchase, implement, and operate systems for interception and analysis of data.
Similar systems are operated by Iranian secret police to identify and suppress dissidents.
The required hardware and software were allegedly installed by German Siemens and Finnish Nokia.
Some governments, such as those of Myanmar, Iran, North Korea, Mainland China, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, restrict access to content on the Internet within their territories, especially to political and religious content, with domain name and keyword filters.
In Norway, Denmark, Finland, and Sweden, major Internet service providers have voluntarily agreed to restrict access to sites listed by authorities.
While this list of forbidden resources is supposed to contain only known child pornography sites, the content of the list is secret.
Many countries, including the United States, have enacted laws against the possession or distribution of certain material, such as child pornography, via the Internet but do not mandate filter software.
Many free or commercially available software programs, called content-control software are available to users to block offensive specific on individual computers or networks in order to limit access by children to pornographic material or depiction of violence.
As the Internet is a heterogeneous network, its physical characteristics, including, for example the data transfer rates of connections, vary widely.
It exhibits emergent phenomena that depend on its large-scale organization.
PB per monthYear020,00040,00060,00080,000100,000120,000140,000199019952000200520102015Petabytes per monthGlobal Internet Traffic Volume.
The volume of Internet traffic is difficult to measure because no single point of measurement exists in the multi-tiered, non-hierarchical topology.
Traffic data may be estimated from the aggregate volume through the peering points of the Tier 1 network providers, but traffic that stays local in large provider networks may not be accounted for.
An Internet blackout or outage can be caused by local signaling interruptions.
Disruptions of submarine communications cables may cause blackouts or slowdowns to large areas, such as in the 2008 submarine cable disruption.
Less-developed countries are more vulnerable due to the small number of high-capacity links.
Land cables are also vulnerable, as in 2011 when a woman digging for scrap metal severed most connectivity for the nation of Armenia.
Internet blackouts affecting almost entire countries can be achieved by governments as a form of Internet censorship, as in the blockage of the Internet in Egypt, whereby approximately 93% of networks were without access in 2011 in an attempt to stop mobilization for anti-government protests.
Estimates of the Internet's electricity usage have been the subject of controversy, according to a 2014 peer-reviewed research paper that found claims differing by a factor of 20,000 published in the literature during the preceding decade, ranging from 0.
The researchers attributed these discrepancies mainly to the year of reference (i.
In 2011, academic researchers estimated the overall energy used by the Internet to be between 170 and 307 GW, less than two percent of the energy used by humanity.
This estimate included the energy needed to build, operate, and periodically replace the estimated 750 million laptops, a billion smart phones and 100 million servers worldwide as well as the energy that routers, cell towers, optical switches, Wi-Fi transmitters and cloud storage devices use when transmitting Internet traffic.
According to a non-peer-reviewed study published in 2018 by The Shift Project (a French think tank funded by corporate sponsors), nearly 4% of global CO2 emissions could be attributed to global data transfer and the necessary infrastructure.
The study also said that online video streaming alone accounted for 60% of this data transfer and therefore contributed to over 300 million tons of CO2 emission per year, and argued for new "digital sobriety" regulations restricting the use and size of video files.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Text taken from World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media Development Global Report 2017/2018​, 202, UNESCO.
Abbate, Janet (1999).
Inventing the Internet.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
ISBN 978-0-262-01172-3.
James Gleick, "How the Web Was Lost" (review of Tim Berners-Lee with Stephen Witt, This Is for Everyone: The Unfinished Story of the World Wide Web, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2025, 389 pp.
How We Built Internet Culture, and Why It Matters, Verso, 2025, 262 pp.
The Internet Explained, Vincent Zegna & Mike Pepper, Sonet Digital, November 2005, pp.
Castells, Manuel (2010).
The Rise of the Network Society.
ISBN 978-1-4051-9686-4.
Yeo, ShinJoung (2023), Behind the Search Box: Google and the Global Internet Industry, U of Illinois Press, ISBN 978-0-252-04499-1, JSTOR 10.
Artificial intelligence (AI) is the capability of computational systems to perform tasks typically associated with human intelligence, such as learning, reasoning, problem-solving, perception, and decision-making.
It is a field of research in engineering, mathematics and computer science that develops and studies methods and software that enable machines to perceive their environment and use learning and intelligence to take actions that maximize their chances of achieving defined goals.
High-profile applications of AI include advanced web search engines, chatbots, virtual assistants, autonomous vehicles, and play and analysis in strategy games (e.
Since the 2020s, generative AI has become widely available to generate images, audio, and videos from text prompts.
The traditional goals of AI research include learning, reasoning, knowledge representation, planning, natural language processing, and perception, as well as support for robotics.
To reach these goals, AI researchers have used techniques including state space search and mathematical optimization, formal logic, artificial neural networks, and methods based on statistics, operations research, and economics.
AI also draws upon psychology, linguistics, philosophy, neuroscience, and other fields.
Some companies, such as OpenAI, Google DeepMind and Meta, aim to create artificial general intelligence (AGI) – AI that can complete virtually any cognitive task at least as well as a human.
Artificial intelligence was founded as an academic discipline in 1956, and the field went through multiple cycles of optimism throughout its history, followed by periods of disappointment and loss of funding, known as AI winters.
Funding and interest increased substantially after 2012, when graphics processing units began being used to accelerate neural networks, and deep learning outperformed previous AI techniques.
This growth accelerated further after 2017 with the transformer architecture.
In the 2020s, an AI boom has coincided with advances in generative AI, which allowed for the creation and modification of media.
In addition to AI safety and unintended consequences and harms from the use of AI, ethical concerns, AI's long-term effects, and potential existential risks have prompted discussions of AI regulation.
The general problem of simulating (or creating) intelligence has been broken into subproblems.
These consist of particular traits or capabilities that researchers expect an intelligent system to display.
The traits described below have received the most attention and cover the scope of AI research.
Early researchers developed algorithms that imitated step-by-step reasoning that humans use when they solve puzzles or make logical deductions.
By the late 1980s and 1990s, methods were developed for dealing with uncertain or incomplete information, employing concepts from probability and economics.
Many of these algorithms are insufficient for solving large reasoning problems because they experience a "combinatorial explosion": They become exponentially slower as the problems grow.
Even humans rarely use the step-by-step deduction that early AI research could model.
They solve most of their problems using fast, intuitive judgments.
Accurate and efficient reasoning is an unsolved problem.
Knowledge representation and knowledge engineering allow AI programs to answer questions intelligently and make deductions about real-world facts.
Formal knowledge representations are used in content-based indexing and retrieval, scene interpretation, clinical decision support, knowledge discovery (mining "interesting" and actionable inferences from large databases), and other areas.
A knowledge base is a body of knowledge represented in a form that can be used by a program.
An ontology is the set of objects, relations, concepts, and properties used by a particular domain of knowledge.
Knowledge bases need to represent things such as objects, properties, categories, and relations between objects; situations, events, states, and time; causes and effects; knowledge about knowledge (what we know about what other people know); default reasoning (things that humans assume are true until they are told differently and will remain true even when other facts are changing); and many other aspects and domains of knowledge.
Among the most difficult problems in knowledge representation are the breadth of commonsense knowledge (the set of atomic facts that the average person knows is enormous); and the sub-symbolic form of most commonsense knowledge (much of what people know is not represented as "facts" or "statements" that they could express verbally).
There is also the difficulty of knowledge acquisition, the problem of obtaining knowledge for AI applications.
An "agent" is any entity (artificial or not) that perceives and takes actions in the world.
A rational agent has goals or preferences and takes actions to make them happen.
In automated planning, the agent has a specific goal.
In automated decision-making, the agent has preferences—there are some situations it would prefer to be in, and some situations it is trying to avoid.
The decision-making agent assigns a number to each situation (called the "utility") that measures how much the agent prefers it.
For each possible action, it can calculate the "expected utility": the utility of all possible outcomes of the action, weighted by the probability that the outcome will occur.
It can then choose the action with the maximum expected utility.
In classical planning, the agent knows exactly what the effect of any action will be.
In most real-world problems, however, the agent may not be certain about the situation they are in (it is "unknown" or "unobservable") and it may not know for certain what will happen after each possible action (it is not "deterministic").
It must choose an action by making a probabilistic guess and then reassess the situation to see if the action worked.
Alongside thorough testing and improvement based on previous decisions, having an explanation for why the agent took certain decisions is a way to build trust, especially when the decisions have to be relied upon.
In some problems, the agent's preferences may be uncertain, especially if there are other agents or humans involved.
These can be learned (e.
Information value theory can be used to weigh the value of exploratory or experimental actions.
The space of possible future actions and situations is typically intractably large, so the agents must take actions and evaluate situations while being uncertain of what the outcome will be.
A Markov decision process has a transition model that describes the probability that a particular action will change the state in a particular way and a reward function that supplies the utility of each state and the cost of each action.
A policy associates a decision with each possible state.
The policy could be calculated (e.
Game theory describes the rational behavior of multiple interacting agents and is used in AI programs that make decisions that involve other agents.
Machine learning is the study of programs that can improve their performance on a given task automatically.
It has been a part of AI from the beginning.
There are several kinds of machine learning.
Unsupervised learning analyzes a stream of data and finds patterns and makes predictions without any other guidance.
Supervised learning requires labeling the training data with the expected answers, and comes in two main varieties: classification (where the program must learn to predict what category the input belongs in) and regression (where the program must deduce a numeric function based on numeric input).
In reinforcement learning, the agent is rewarded for good responses and punished for bad ones.
The agent learns to choose responses that are classified as "good".
Transfer learning is when the knowledge gained from one problem is applied to a new problem.
Deep learning is a type of machine learning that runs inputs through biologically inspired artificial neural networks for all of these types of learning.
Computational learning theory can assess learners by computational complexity, by sample complexity (how much data is required), or by other notions of optimization.
Natural language processing (NLP) allows programs to read, write and communicate in human languages.
Specific problems include speech recognition, speech synthesis, machine translation, information extraction, information retrieval and question answering.
Early work, based on Noam Chomsky's generative grammar and semantic networks, had difficulty with word-sense disambiguation unless restricted to small domains called "micro-worlds" (due to the common sense knowledge problem).
Margaret Masterman believed that it was meaning and not grammar that was the key to understanding languages, and that thesauri and not dictionaries should be the basis of computational language structure.
Modern deep learning techniques for NLP include word embedding (representing words, typically as vectors encoding their meaning), transformers (a deep learning architecture using an attention mechanism), and others.
In 2019, generative pre-trained transformer (or "GPT") language models began to generate coherent text, and by 2023, these models were able to get human-level scores on the bar exam, SAT test, GRE test, and many other real-world applications.
Machine perception is the ability to use input from sensors (such as cameras, microphones, wireless signals, active lidar, sonar, radar, and tactile sensors) to deduce aspects of the world.
Computer vision is the ability to analyze visual input.
The field includes speech recognition, image classification, facial recognition, object recognition, object tracking, and robotic perception.
Affective computing is a field that comprises systems that recognize, interpret, process, or simulate human feeling, emotion, and mood.
For example, some virtual assistants are programmed to speak conversationally or even to banter humorously; it makes them appear more sensitive to the emotional dynamics of human interaction, or to otherwise facilitate human–computer interaction.
However, this tends to give naïve users an unrealistic conception of the intelligence of existing computer agents.
Moderate successes related to affective computing include textual sentiment analysis and, more recently, multimodal sentiment analysis, wherein AI classifies the effects displayed by a videotaped subject.
A machine with artificial general intelligence would be able to solve a wide variety of problems with breadth and versatility similar to human intelligence.
AI research uses a wide variety of techniques to accomplish the goals above.
State space search searches through a tree of possible states to try to find a goal state.
For example, planning algorithms search through trees of goals and subgoals, attempting to find a path to a target goal, a process called means-ends analysis.
Simple exhaustive searches are rarely sufficient for most real-world problems: the search space (the number of places to search) quickly grows to astronomical numbers.
The result is a search that is too slow or never completes.
Adversarial search is used for game-playing programs, such as chess or Go.
It searches through a tree of possible moves and countermoves, looking for a winning position.
Local search uses mathematical optimization to find a solution to a problem.
It begins with some form of guess and refines it incrementally.
Gradient descent is a type of local search that optimizes a set of numerical parameters by incrementally adjusting them to minimize a loss function.
Variants of gradient descent are commonly used to train neural networks, through the backpropagation algorithm.
Another type of local search is evolutionary computation, which aims to iteratively improve a set of candidate solutions by "mutating" and "recombining" them, selecting only the fittest to survive each generation.
Distributed search processes can coordinate via swarm intelligence algorithms.
Two popular swarm algorithms used in search are particle swarm optimization (inspired by bird flocking) and ant colony optimization (inspired by ant trails).
Formal logic is used for reasoning and knowledge representation.
Formal logic comes in two main forms: propositional logic (which operates on statements that are true or false and uses logical connectives such as "and", "or", "not" and "implies") and predicate logic (which also operates on objects, predicates and relations and uses quantifiers such as "Every X is a Y" and "There are some Xs that are Ys").
Deductive reasoning in logic is the process of proving a new statement (conclusion) from other statements that are given and assumed to be true (the premises).
Proofs can be structured as proof trees, in which nodes are labelled by sentences, and children nodes are connected to parent nodes by inference rules.
Given a problem and a set of premises, problem-solving reduces to searching for a proof tree whose root node is labelled by a solution of the problem and whose leaf nodes are labelled by premises or axioms.
In the case of Horn clauses, problem-solving search can be performed by reasoning forwards from the premises or backwards from the problem.
In the more general case of the clausal form of first-order logic, resolution is a single, axiom-free rule of inference, in which a problem is solved by proving a contradiction from premises that include the negation of the problem to be solved.
Inference in both Horn clause logic and first-order logic is undecidable, and therefore intractable.
However, backward reasoning with Horn clauses, which underpins computation in the logic programming language Prolog, is Turing complete.
Moreover, its efficiency is competitive with computation in other symbolic programming languages.
Fuzzy logic assigns a "degree of truth" between 0 and 1.
It can therefore handle propositions that are vague and partially true.
Non-monotonic logics, including logic programming with negation as failure, are designed to handle default reasoning.
Other specialized versions of logic have been developed to describe many complex domains.
Many problems in AI (including reasoning, planning, learning, perception, and robotics) require the agent to operate with incomplete or uncertain information.
AI researchers have devised a number of tools to solve these problems using methods from probability theory and economics.
Precise mathematical tools have been developed that analyze how an agent can make choices and plan, using decision theory, decision analysis, and information value theory.
These tools include models such as Markov decision processes, dynamic decision networks, game theory and mechanism design.
Bayesian networks are a tool that can be used for reasoning (using the Bayesian inference algorithm), learning (using the expectation–maximization algorithm), planning (using decision networks) and perception (using dynamic Bayesian networks).
Probabilistic algorithms can also be used for filtering, prediction, smoothing, and finding explanations for streams of data, thus helping perception systems analyze processes that occur over time (e.
The simplest AI applications can be divided into two types: classifiers (e.
Classifiers are functions that use pattern matching to determine the closest match.
They can be fine-tuned based on chosen examples using supervised learning.
Each pattern (also called an "observation") is labeled with a certain predefined class.
All the observations combined with their class labels are known as a data set.
When a new observation is received, that observation is classified based on previous experience.
There are many kinds of classifiers in use.
The decision tree is the simplest and most widely used symbolic machine learning algorithm.
K-nearest neighbor algorithm was the most widely used analogical AI until the mid-1990s, and Kernel methods such as the support vector machine (SVM) displaced k-nearest neighbor in the 1990s.
The naive Bayes classifier is reportedly the "most widely used learner" at Google, due in part to its scalability.
Neural networks are also used as classifiers.
An artificial neural network is based on a collection of nodes also known as artificial neurons, which loosely model the neurons in a biological brain.
It is trained to recognise patterns; once trained, it can recognise those patterns in fresh data.
There is an input, at least one hidden layer of nodes and an output.
Each node applies a function and once the weight crosses its specified threshold, the data is transmitted to the next layer.
A network is typically called a deep neural network if it has at least 2 hidden layers.
Learning algorithms for neural networks use local search to choose the weights that will get the right output for each input during training.
The most common training technique is the backpropagation algorithm.
Neural networks learn to model complex relationships between inputs and outputs and find patterns in data.
In theory, a neural network can learn any function.
In feedforward neural networks the signal passes in only one direction.
The term perceptron typically refers to a single-layer neural network.
In contrast, deep learning uses many layers.
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) feed the output signal back into the input, which allows short-term memories of previous input events.
Long short-term memory networks (LSTMs) are recurrent neural networks that better preserve longterm dependencies and are less sensitive to the vanishing gradient problem.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) use layers of kernels to more efficiently process local patterns.
This local processing is especially important in image processing, where the early CNN layers typically identify simple local patterns such as edges and curves, with subsequent layers detecting more complex patterns like textures, and eventually whole objects.
Deep learning uses several layers of neurons between the network's inputs and outputs.
The multiple layers can progressively extract higher-level features from the raw input.
For example, in image processing, lower layers may identify edges, while higher layers may identify the concepts relevant to a human such as digits, letters, or faces.
Deep learning has profoundly improved the performance of programs in many important subfields of artificial intelligence, including computer vision, speech recognition, natural language processing, image classification, and others.
The reason that deep learning performs so well in so many applications is not known as of 2021.
The sudden success of deep learning in 2012–2015 did not occur because of some new discovery or theoretical breakthrough (deep neural networks and backpropagation had been described by many people, as far back as the 1950s) but because of two factors: the incredible increase in computer power (including the hundred-fold increase in speed by switching to GPUs) and the availability of vast amounts of training data, especially the giant curated datasets used for benchmark testing, such as ImageNet.
Generative pre-trained transformers (GPT) are large language models (LLMs) that generate text based on the semantic relationships between words in sentences.
Text-based GPT models are pre-trained on a large corpus of text that can be from the Internet.
The pretraining consists of predicting the next token (a token being usually a word, subword, or punctuation).
Throughout this pretraining, GPT models accumulate knowledge about the world and can then generate human-like text by repeatedly predicting the next token.
Typically, a subsequent training phase makes the model more truthful, useful, and harmless, usually with a technique called reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF).
Current GPT models are prone to generating falsehoods called "hallucinations".
These can be reduced with RLHF and quality data, but the problem has been getting worse for reasoning systems.
Such systems are used in chatbots, which allow people to ask a question or request a task in simple text.
Current models and services include ChatGPT, Claude, Gemini, Copilot, and Meta AI.
Multimodal GPT models can process different types of data (modalities) such as images, videos, sound, and text.
In the late 2010s, graphics processing units (GPUs) that were increasingly designed with AI-specific enhancements and used with specialized TensorFlow software had replaced previously used central processing unit (CPUs) as the dominant means for large-scale (commercial and academic) machine learning models' training.
Specialized programming languages such as Prolog were used in early AI research, but general-purpose programming languages like Python have become predominant.
The transistor density in integrated circuits has been observed to roughly double every 18 months—a trend known as Moore's law, named after the Intel co-founder Gordon Moore, who first identified it.
Improvements in GPUs have been even faster, a trend sometimes called Huang's law, named after Nvidia co-founder and CEO Jensen Huang.
The deployment of AI may be overseen by a chief automation officer (CAO).
It has been suggested that AI can overcome discrepancies in funding allocated to different fields of research.
AlphaFold 2 (2021) demonstrated the ability to approximate, in hours rather than months, the 3D structure of a protein.
In 2023, it was reported that AI-guided drug discovery helped find a class of antibiotics capable of killing two different types of drug-resistant bacteria.
In 2024, researchers used machine learning to accelerate the search for Parkinson's disease drug treatments.
Their aim was to identify compounds that block the clumping, or aggregation, of alpha-synuclein (the protein that characterises Parkinson's disease).
They were able to speed up the initial screening process ten-fold and reduce the cost by a thousand-fold.
Game playing programs have been used since the 1950s to demonstrate and test AI's most advanced techniques.
Deep Blue became the first computer chess-playing system to beat a reigning world chess champion, Garry Kasparov, on 11 May 1997.
In 2011, in a Jeopardy!
In March 2016, AlphaGo won 4 out of 5 games of Go in a match with Go champion Lee Sedol, becoming the first computer Go-playing system to beat a professional Go player without handicaps.
Then, in 2017, it defeated Ke Jie, who was the best Go player in the world.
Other programs handle imperfect-information games, such as the poker-playing program Pluribus.
DeepMind developed increasingly generalistic reinforcement learning models, such as with MuZero, which could be trained to play chess, Go, or Atari games.
In 2019, DeepMind's AlphaStar achieved grandmaster level in StarCraft II, a particularly challenging real-time strategy game that involves incomplete knowledge of what happens on the map.
In 2021, an AI agent competed in a PlayStation Gran Turismo competition, winning against four of the world's best Gran Turismo drivers using deep reinforcement learning.
In 2024, Google DeepMind introduced SIMA, a type of AI capable of autonomously playing nine previously unseen open-world video games by observing screen output, as well as executing short, specific tasks in response to natural language instructions.
In mathematics, probabilistic large language models are versatile, but can also produce wrong answers in the form of hallucinations.
The Alibaba Group developed a version of its Qwen models called Qwen2-Math, that achieved state-of-the-art performance on several mathematical benchmarks, including 84% accuracy on the MATH dataset of competition mathematics problems.
In January 2025, Microsoft proposed the technique rStar-Math that leverages Monte Carlo tree search and step-by-step reasoning, enabling a relatively small language model like Qwen-7B to solve 53% of the AIME 2024 and 90% of the MATH benchmark problems.
Google DeepMind has developed models for solving mathematical problems: AlphaTensor, AlphaGeometry, AlphaProof and AlphaEvolve.
When natural language is used to describe mathematical problems, converters can transform such prompts into a formal language such as Lean to define mathematical tasks.
The experimental model Gemini Deep Think accepts natural language prompts directly and achieved gold medal results in the International Math Olympiad of 2025.
Topological deep learning integrates various topological approaches.
According to Nicolas Firzli, director of the World Pensions & Investments Forum, it may be too early to see the emergence of highly innovative AI-informed financial products and services.
He argues that "the deployment of AI tools will simply further automatise things: destroying tens of thousands of jobs in banking, financial planning, and pension advice in the process, but I'm not sure it will unleash a new wave of [e.
Various countries are deploying AI military applications.
The main applications enhance command and control, communications, sensors, integration and interoperability.
Research is targeting intelligence collection and analysis, logistics, cyber operations, information operations, and semiautonomous and autonomous vehicles.
AI technologies enable coordination of sensors and effectors, threat detection and identification, marking of enemy positions, target acquisition, coordination and deconfliction of distributed Joint Fires between networked combat vehicles, both human-operated and autonomous.
AI has been used in military operations in Iraq, Syria, Israel and Ukraine.
AI agents are software entities designed to perceive their environment, make decisions, and take actions autonomously to achieve specific goals.
These agents can interact with users, their environment, or other agents.
AI agents are used in various applications, including virtual assistants, chatbots, autonomous vehicles, game-playing systems, and industrial robotics.
AI agents operate within the constraints of their programming, available computational resources, and hardware limitations.
This means they are restricted to performing tasks within their defined scope and have finite memory and processing capabilities.
In real-world applications, AI agents often face time constraints for decision-making and action execution.
Many AI agents incorporate learning algorithms, enabling them to improve their performance over time through experience or training.
Using machine learning, AI agents can adapt to new situations and optimise their behaviour for their designated tasks.
Microsoft introduced Copilot Search in February 2023 under the name Bing Chat.
Copilot Search provides AI-generated summaries.
Google introduced an AI Mode at its Google I/O event on 20 May 2025.
Applications of AI in this domain include AI-enabled menstruation and fertility trackers that analyze user data to offer predictions, AI-integrated sex toys (e.
AI is also used for the production of non-consensual deepfake pornography, raising significant ethical and legal concerns.
AI technologies have also been used to attempt to identify online gender-based violence and online sexual grooming of minors.
In a 2017 survey, one in five companies reported having incorporated "AI" in some offerings or processes.
In the field of evacuation and disaster management, AI has been used to investigate patterns in large-scale and small-scale evacuations using historical data from GPS, videos or social media.
During the 2024 Indian elections, US$50 million was spent on authorized AI-generated content, notably by creating deepfakes of allied (including sometimes deceased) politicians to better engage with voters, and by translating speeches to various local languages.
The use of generative AI by law firms for legal research resulted in the creation of the global "AI Hallucination Cases" database, in April 2025, established by HEC Paris and Sciences Po legal data analysis lecturer Damien Charlotin.
By 2026, judges had issued sanctions and bar associations had issued warnings due to attorney submissions to the courts containing fabricated case law citations hallucinated by AI tools.
AI has potential benefits and potential risks.
AI may be able to advance science and find solutions for serious problems: Demis Hassabis of DeepMind hopes to "solve intelligence, and then use that to solve everything else".
However, as the use of AI has become widespread, several unintended consequences and risks have been identified.
In-production systems can sometimes not factor ethics and bias into their AI training processes, especially when the AI algorithms are inherently unexplainable in deep learning.
Machine learning algorithms require large amounts of data.
The techniques used to acquire this data have raised concerns about privacy, surveillance and copyright.
AI-powered devices and services, such as virtual assistants and IoT products, continuously collect personal information, raising concerns about intrusive data gathering and unauthorized access by third parties.
The loss of privacy is further exacerbated by AI's ability to process and combine vast amounts of data, potentially leading to a surveillance society where individual activities are constantly monitored and analyzed without adequate safeguards or transparency.
Sensitive user data collected may include online activity records, geolocation data, video, or audio.
For example, in order to build speech recognition algorithms, Amazon has recorded millions of private conversations and allowed temporary workers to listen to and transcribe some of them.
Opinions about this widespread surveillance range from those who see it as a necessary evil to those for whom it is clearly unethical and a violation of the right to privacy.
AI developers argue that this is the only way to deliver valuable applications and have developed several techniques that attempt to preserve privacy while still obtaining the data, such as data aggregation, de-identification and differential privacy.
Since 2016, some privacy experts, such as Cynthia Dwork, have begun to view privacy in terms of fairness.
Brian Christian wrote that experts have pivoted "from the question of 'what they know' to the question of 'what they're doing with it'.
Generative AI is often trained on unlicensed copyrighted works, including in domains such as images or computer code; the output is then used under the rationale of "fair use".
Experts disagree about how well and under what circumstances this rationale will hold up in courts of law; relevant factors may include "the purpose and character of the use of the copyrighted work" and "the effect upon the potential market for the copyrighted work".
Website owners can indicate that they do not want their content scraped via a "robots.
However, some companies will scrape content regardless because the robots.
In 2023, leading authors (including John Grisham and Jonathan Franzen) sued AI companies for using their work to train generative AI.
Another discussed approach is to envision a separate sui generis system of protection for creations generated by AI to ensure fair attribution and compensation for human authors.
The commercial AI scene is dominated by Big Tech companies such as Alphabet Inc.
Some of these players already own the vast majority of existing cloud infrastructure and computing power from data centers, allowing them to entrench further in the marketplace.
Technology companies have built electricity and artificial intelligence infrastructure to facilitate the AI boom of the 2020s.
A 2025 report from the consulting firm McKinsey & Company estimated that by 2030, $2.
In January 2024, the International Energy Agency (IEA) released Electricity 2024, Analysis and Forecast to 2026.
This is the first IEA report to make projections for data centers and power consumption by AI and cryptocurrency.
The report states that power demand for these uses might double by 2026, with the additional power consumption equaling that of Japan.
Power consumption by AI is responsible for an increase in fossil fuel use, and has delayed closings of obsolete, carbon-emitting coal energy facilities.
A ChatGPT search involves the use of 10 times the electrical energy as a Google search.
A 2024 Goldman Sachs Research Paper, AI Data Centers and the Coming US Power Demand Surge, found "US power demand (is) likely to experience growth not seen in a generation.
Data centers' need for more and more electrical power is such that they might max out the electrical grid.
The Big Tech companies counter that AI can be used to maximize the utilization of the grid by all.
In 2024, The Wall Street Journal reported that big AI companies have begun negotiations with the US nuclear power providers to provide electricity to the data centers.
In March 2024 Amazon purchased a Pennsylvania nuclear-powered data center for US$650 million.
In September 2024, Microsoft announced an agreement with Constellation Energy to re-open the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant to provide Microsoft with 100% of all electric power produced by the plant for 20 years.
Reopening the plant, which suffered a partial nuclear meltdown of its Unit 2 reactor in 1979, will require Constellation to get through strict regulatory processes which will include extensive safety scrutiny from the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
If approved (this will be the first ever US re-commissioning of a nuclear plant), over 835 megawatts of power – enough for 800,000 homes – of energy will be produced.
The cost for re-opening and upgrading is estimated at US$1.
As of 2024, the US government and the state of Michigan have been investing almost US$2 billion to reopen the Palisades Nuclear reactor on Lake Michigan.
Closed since 2022, the plant was planned to be reopened in October 2025.
After the last approval in September 2023, Taiwan suspended the approval of data centers north of Taoyuan with a capacity of more than 5 MW in 2024, due to power supply shortages.
Taiwan aims to phase out nuclear power by 2025.
Singapore imposed a ban on the opening of data centers in 2019 due to electric power, but in 2022, lifted this ban.
Although most nuclear plants in Japan have been shut down after the 2011 Fukushima nuclear accident, according to an October 2024 Bloomberg article in Japanese, cloud gaming services company Ubitus, in which Nvidia has a stake, is looking for land in Japan near a nuclear power plant for a new data center for generative AI.
On 1 November 2024, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) rejected an application submitted by Talen Energy for approval to supply some electricity from the nuclear power station Susquehanna to Amazon's data center.
According to the Commission Chairman Willie L.
Phillips, it is a burden on the electricity grid as well as a significant cost shifting concern to households and other business sectors.
In 2025, a report prepared by the IEA estimated the greenhouse gas emissions from the energy consumption of AI at 180 million tons.
By 2035, these emissions could rise to 300–500 million tonnes depending on what measures will be taken.
The emissions reduction potential of AI was estimated at 5% of the energy sector emissions, but rebound effects (for example if people switch from public transport to autonomous cars) can reduce it.
YouTube, Facebook and others use recommender systems to guide users to more content.
These AI programs were given the goal of maximizing user engagement (that is, the only goal was to keep people watching).
The AI learned that users tended to choose misinformation, conspiracy theories, and extreme partisan content, and, to keep them watching, the AI recommended more of it.
Users also tended to watch more content on the same subject, so the AI led people into filter bubbles where they received multiple versions of the same misinformation.
This convinced many users that the misinformation was true, and ultimately undermined trust in institutions, the media and the government.
The AI program had correctly learned to maximize its goal, but the result was harmful to society.
In the early 2020s, generative AI began to create images, audio, and texts that are virtually indistinguishable from real photographs, recordings, or human writing, while realistic AI-generated videos became feasible in the mid-2020s.
It is possible for bad actors to use this technology to create massive amounts of misinformation or propaganda; one such potential malicious use is deepfakes for computational propaganda.
AI pioneer and Nobel Prize-winning computer scientist Geoffrey Hinton expressed concern about AI enabling "authoritarian leaders to manipulate their electorates" on a large scale, among other risks.
The ability to influence electorates has been proved in at least one study.
This same study shows more inaccurate statements from the models when they advocate for candidates of the political right.
AI researchers at Microsoft, OpenAI, universities and other organisations have suggested using "personhood credentials" as a way to overcome online deception enabled by AI models.
Machine learning applications can be biased if they learn from biased data.
The developers may not be aware that the bias exists.
Discriminatory behavior by some LLMs can be observed in their output.
Bias can be introduced by the way training data is selected and by the way a model is deployed.
If a biased algorithm is used to make decisions that can seriously harm people (as it can in medicine, finance, recruitment, housing or policing) then the algorithm may cause discrimination.
The field of fairness studies how to prevent harms from algorithmic biases.
On 28 June 2015, Google Photos's new image labeling feature mistakenly identified Jacky Alcine and a friend as "gorillas" because they were black.
The system was trained on a dataset that contained very few images of black people, a problem called "sample size disparity".
Google "fixed" this problem by preventing the system from labelling anything as a "gorilla".
Eight years later, in 2023, Google Photos still could not identify a gorilla, and neither could similar products from Apple, Facebook, Microsoft and Amazon.
COMPAS is a commercial program widely used by U.
In 2016, Julia Angwin at ProPublica discovered that COMPAS exhibited racial bias, despite the fact that the program was not told the races of the defendants.
Although the error rate for both whites and blacks was calibrated equal at exactly 61%, the errors for each race were different—the system consistently overestimated the chance that a black person would re-offend and would underestimate the chance that a white person would not re-offend.
In 2017, several researchers showed that it was mathematically impossible for COMPAS to accommodate all possible measures of fairness when the base rates of re-offense were different for whites and blacks in the data.
A program can make biased decisions even if the data does not explicitly mention a problematic feature (such as "race" or "gender").
The feature will correlate with other features (like "address", "shopping history" or "first name"), and the program will make the same decisions based on these features as it would on "race" or "gender".
Moritz Hardt said "the most robust fact in this research area is that fairness through blindness doesn't work.
Criticism of COMPAS highlighted that machine learning models are designed to make "predictions" that are only valid if we assume that the future will resemble the past.
If they are trained on data that includes the results of racist decisions in the past, machine learning models must predict that racist decisions will be made in the future.
If an application then uses these predictions as recommendations, some of these "recommendations" will likely be racist.
Thus, machine learning is not well suited to help make decisions in areas where there is hope that the future will be better than the past.
It is descriptive rather than prescriptive.
Bias and unfairness may go undetected because the developers are overwhelmingly white and male: among AI engineers, about 4% are black and 20% are women.
There are various conflicting definitions and mathematical models of fairness.
These notions depend on ethical assumptions, and are influenced by beliefs about society.
One broad category is distributive fairness, which focuses on the outcomes, often identifying groups and seeking to compensate for statistical disparities.
Representational fairness tries to ensure that AI systems do not reinforce negative stereotypes or render certain groups invisible.
Procedural fairness focuses on the decision process rather than the outcome.
The most relevant notions of fairness may depend on the context, notably the type of AI application and the stakeholders.
The subjectivity in the notions of bias and fairness makes it difficult for companies to operationalize them.
Having access to sensitive attributes such as race or gender is also considered by many AI ethicists to be necessary in order to compensate for biases, but it may conflict with anti-discrimination laws.
At the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency a paper reported that a CLIP‑based (Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training) robotic system reproduced harmful gender‑ and race‑linked stereotypes in a simulated manipulation task.
The authors recommended robot‑learning methods which physically manifest such harms be "paused, reworked, or even wound down when appropriate, until outcomes can be proven safe, effective, and just.
Many AI systems are so complex that their designers cannot explain how they reach their decisions.
Particularly with deep neural networks, in which there are many non-linear relationships between inputs and outputs.
But some popular explainability techniques exist.
It is impossible to be certain that a program is operating correctly if no one knows how exactly it works.
There have been many cases where a machine learning program passed rigorous tests, but nevertheless learned something different than what the programmers intended.
For example, a system that could identify skin diseases better than medical professionals was found to actually have a strong tendency to classify images with a ruler as "cancerous", because pictures of malignancies typically include a ruler to show the scale.
Another machine learning system designed to help effectively allocate medical resources was found to classify patients with asthma as being at "low risk" of dying from pneumonia.
Having asthma is actually a severe risk factor, but since the patients having asthma would usually get much more medical care, they were relatively unlikely to die according to the training data.
The correlation between asthma and low risk of dying from pneumonia was real, but misleading.
People who have been harmed by an algorithm's decision have a right to an explanation.
Doctors, for example, are expected to clearly and completely explain to their colleagues the reasoning behind any decision they make.
Early drafts of the European Union's General Data Protection Regulation in 2016 included an explicit statement that this right exists.
Industry experts noted that this is an unsolved problem with no solution in sight.
Regulators argued that nevertheless the harm is real: if the problem has no solution, the tools should not be used.
DARPA established the XAI ("Explainable Artificial Intelligence") program in 2014 to try to solve these problems.
Several approaches aim to address the transparency problem.
SHAP enables to visualise the contribution of each feature to the output.
LIME can locally approximate a model's outputs with a simpler, interpretable model.
Multitask learning provides a large number of outputs in addition to the target classification.
These other outputs can help developers deduce what the network has learned.
Deconvolution, DeepDream and other generative methods can allow developers to see what different layers of a deep network for computer vision have learned, and produce output that can suggest what the network is learning.
For generative pre-trained transformers, Anthropic developed a technique based on dictionary learning that associates patterns of neuron activations with human-understandable concepts.
Artificial intelligence provides a number of tools that are useful to bad actors, such as authoritarian governments, terrorists, criminals or rogue states.
A lethal autonomous weapon is a machine that locates, selects and engages human targets without human supervision.
Widely available AI tools can be used by bad actors to develop inexpensive autonomous weapons and, if produced at scale, they are potentially weapons of mass destruction.
Even when used in conventional warfare, they currently cannot reliably choose targets and could potentially kill an innocent person.
In 2014, 30 nations (including China) supported a ban on autonomous weapons under the United Nations' Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, however the United States and others disagreed.
By 2015, over fifty countries were reported to be researching battlefield robots.
AI tools make it easier for authoritarian governments to efficiently control their citizens in several ways.
Face and voice recognition allow widespread surveillance.
Machine learning, operating this data, can classify potential enemies of the state and prevent them from hiding.
Recommendation systems can precisely target propaganda and misinformation for maximum effect.
Deepfakes and generative AI aid in producing misinformation.
Advanced AI can make authoritarian centralized decision-making more competitive than liberal and decentralized systems such as markets.
It lowers the cost and difficulty of digital warfare and advanced spyware.
All these technologies have been available since 2020 or earlier—AI facial recognition systems are already being used for mass surveillance in China.
There are many other ways in which AI is expected to help bad actors, some of which can not be foreseen.
For example, machine-learning AI is able to design tens of thousands of toxic molecules in a matter of hours.
Economists have frequently highlighted the risks of redundancies from AI, and speculated about unemployment if there is no adequate social policy for full employment.
In the past, technology has tended to increase rather than reduce total employment, but economists acknowledge that "we're in uncharted territory" with AI.
A survey of economists showed disagreement about whether the increasing use of robots and AI will cause a substantial increase in long-term unemployment, but they generally agree that it could be a net benefit if productivity gains are redistributed.
Risk estimates vary; for example, in the 2010s, Michael Osborne and Carl Benedikt Frey estimated 47% of U.
The methodology of speculating about future employment levels has been criticised as lacking evidential foundation, and for implying that technology, rather than social policy, creates unemployment, as opposed to redundancies.
In April 2023, it was reported that 70% of the jobs for Chinese video game illustrators had been eliminated by generative artificial intelligence.
Early-career workers showed decreasing employment rates in some AI-exposed occupations.
Unlike previous waves of automation, many middle-class jobs may be eliminated by artificial intelligence; The Economist stated in 2015 that "the worry that AI could do to white-collar jobs what steam power did to blue-collar ones during the Industrial Revolution" is "worth taking seriously".
Jobs at extreme risk range from paralegals to fast food cooks, while job demand is likely to increase for care-related professions ranging from personal healthcare to the clergy.
In July 2025, Ford CEO Jim Farley predicted that "artificial intelligence is going to replace literally half of all white-collar workers in the U.
From the early days of the development of artificial intelligence, there have been arguments, for example, those put forward by Joseph Weizenbaum, about whether tasks that can be done by computers actually should be done by them, given the difference between computers and humans, and between quantitative calculation and qualitative, value-based judgement.
With the increase of loneliness in the early 21st century, AI is sometimes identified as a potential source of relief to this problem.
It would be possible, via human-like qualities built into AI products, for individuals to assume that this need can be met by artificial means.
In some cases, people approach artificial intelligence for companionship when they believe that they would not find acceptance due to feeling outcast.
Examples of harm coming to humans from advanced chatbots have been reported in courts in the United States, with AI companies accused of creating products that endanger humans through emotional confusion or deception.
Recent public debates in artificial intelligence have increasingly focused on its broader societal and ethical implications.
It has been argued AI will become so powerful that humanity may irreversibly lose control of it.
This could, as physicist Stephen Hawking stated, "spell the end of the human race".
This scenario has been common in science fiction, when a computer or robot suddenly develops a human-like "self-awareness" (or "sentience" or "consciousness") and becomes a malevolent character.
These sci-fi scenarios are misleading in several ways.
First, AI does not require human-like sentience to be an existential risk.
Modern AI programs are given specific goals and use learning and intelligence to achieve them.
Philosopher Nick Bostrom argued that if one gives almost any goal to a sufficiently powerful AI, it may choose to destroy humanity to achieve it (he used the example of an automated paperclip factory that destroys the world to get more iron for paperclips).
Stuart Russell gives the example of household robot that tries to find a way to kill its owner to prevent it from being unplugged, reasoning that "you can't fetch the coffee if you're dead.
Second, Yuval Noah Harari argues that AI does not require a robot body or physical control to pose an existential risk.
The essential parts of civilization are not physical.
Things like ideologies, law, government, money and the economy are built on language; they exist because there are stories that billions of people believe.
The current prevalence of misinformation suggests that an AI could use language to convince people to believe anything, even to take actions that are destructive.
Geoffrey Hinton said in 2025 that modern AI is particularly "good at persuasion" and getting better all the time.
He asks "Suppose you wanted to invade the capital of the US.
Do you have to go there and do it yourself?
You just have to be good at persuasion.
The opinions amongst experts and industry insiders are mixed, with sizable fractions both concerned and unconcerned by risk from eventual superintelligent AI.
Personalities such as Stephen Hawking, Bill Gates, and Elon Musk, as well as AI pioneers such as Geoffrey Hinton, Yoshua Bengio, Stuart Russell, Demis Hassabis, and Sam Altman, have expressed concerns about existential risk from AI.
In May 2023, Geoffrey Hinton announced his resignation from Google in order to be able to "freely speak out about the risks of AI" without "considering how this impacts Google".
He notably mentioned risks of an AI takeover, and stressed that in order to avoid the worst outcomes, establishing safety guidelines will require cooperation among those competing in use of AI.
In 2023, many leading AI experts endorsed the joint statement that "Mitigating the risk of extinction from AI should be a global priority alongside other societal-scale risks such as pandemics and nuclear war".
Some other researchers were more optimistic.
AI pioneer Jürgen Schmidhuber did not sign the joint statement, emphasising that in 95% of all cases, AI research is about making "human lives longer and healthier and easier.
However, after 2016, the study of current and future risks and possible solutions became a serious area of research.
Friendly AI are machines that have been designed from the beginning to minimize risks and to make choices that benefit humans.
Eliezer Yudkowsky, who coined the term, argues that developing friendly AI should be a higher research priority: it may require a large investment and it must be completed before AI becomes an existential risk.
Machines with intelligence have the potential to use their intelligence to make ethical decisions.
The field of machine ethics provides machines with ethical principles and procedures for resolving ethical dilemmas.
Other approaches include Wendell Wallach's "artificial moral agents" and Stuart J.
Russell's three principles for developing provably beneficial machines.
Active organizations in the AI open-source community include Hugging Face, Google, EleutherAI and Meta.
Various AI models, such as Llama 2, Mistral or Stable Diffusion, have been made open-weight, meaning that their architecture and trained parameters (the "weights") are publicly available.
Open-weight models can be freely fine-tuned, which allows companies to specialize them with their own data and for their own use-case.
Open-weight models are useful for research and innovation but can also be misused.
Since they can be fine-tuned, any built-in security measure, such as objecting to harmful requests, can be trained away until it becomes ineffective.
Some researchers warn that future AI models may develop dangerous capabilities (such as the potential to drastically facilitate bioterrorism) and that once released on the Internet, they cannot be deleted everywhere if needed.
They recommend pre-release audits and cost-benefit analyses.
Artificial intelligence projects can be guided by ethical considerations during the design, development, and implementation of an AI system.
Other developments in ethical frameworks include those decided upon during the Asilomar Conference, the Montreal Declaration for Responsible AI, and the IEEE's Ethics of Autonomous Systems initiative, among others; however, these principles are not without criticism, especially regarding the people chosen to contribute to these frameworks.
Promotion of the wellbeing of the people and communities that these technologies affect requires consideration of the social and ethical implications at all stages of AI system design, development and implementation, and collaboration between job roles such as data scientists, product managers, data engineers, domain experts, and delivery managers.
The UK AI Safety Institute released in 2024 a testing toolset called 'Inspect' for AI safety evaluations available under an MIT open-source licence which is freely available on GitHub and can be improved with third-party packages.
It can be used to evaluate AI models in a range of areas including core knowledge, ability to reason, and autonomous capabilities.
The regulation of artificial intelligence is the development of public sector policies and laws for promoting and regulating AI; it is therefore related to the broader regulation of algorithms.
The regulatory and policy landscape for AI is an emerging issue in jurisdictions globally.
According to AI Index at Stanford, the annual number of AI-related laws passed in the 127 survey countries jumped from one passed in 2016 to 37 passed in 2022 alone.
Between 2016 and 2020, more than 30 countries adopted dedicated strategies for AI.
Most EU member states had released national AI strategies, as had Canada, China, India, Japan, Mauritius, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, U.
Others were in the process of elaborating their own AI strategy, including Bangladesh, Malaysia and Tunisia.
The Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence was launched in June 2020, stating a need for AI to be developed in accordance with human rights and democratic values, to ensure public confidence and trust in the technology.
Henry Kissinger, Eric Schmidt, and Daniel Huttenlocher published a joint statement in November 2021 calling for a government commission to regulate AI.
In 2023, OpenAI leaders published recommendations for the governance of superintelligence, which they believe may happen in less than 10 years.
In 2023, the United Nations also launched an advisory body to provide recommendations on AI governance; the body comprises technology company executives, government officials and academics.
On 1 August 2024, the EU Artificial Intelligence Act entered into force, establishing the first comprehensive EU-wide AI regulation.
In 2024, the Council of Europe created the first international legally binding treaty on AI, called the "Framework Convention on Artificial Intelligence and Human Rights, Democracy and the Rule of Law".
It was adopted by the European Union, the United States, the United Kingdom, and other signatories.
In a 2022 Ipsos survey, attitudes towards AI varied greatly by country; 78% of Chinese citizens, but only 35% of Americans, agreed that "products and services using AI have more benefits than drawbacks".
A 2023 Reuters/Ipsos poll found that 61% of Americans agree, and 22% disagree, that AI poses risks to humanity.
In a 2023 Fox News poll, 35% of Americans thought it "very important", and an additional 41% thought it "somewhat important", for the federal government to regulate AI, versus 13% responding "not very important" and 8% responding "not at all important".
In November 2023, the first global AI Safety Summit was held in Bletchley Park in the UK to discuss the near and far term risks of AI and the possibility of mandatory and voluntary regulatory frameworks.
In May 2024 at the AI Seoul Summit, 16 global AI tech companies agreed to safety commitments on the development of AI.
In March 2026, the United Nations convened the inaugural meeting of the Independent International Scientific Panel on AI, a 40-member expert body established under the Global Digital Compact to produce annual evidence-based reports on AI's societal impacts.
The study of mechanical or "formal" reasoning began with philosophers and mathematicians in antiquity.
The study of logic led directly to Alan Turing's theory of computation, which suggested that a machine, by shuffling symbols as simple as "0" and "1", could simulate any conceivable form of mathematical reasoning.
This, along with concurrent discoveries in cybernetics, information theory and neurobiology, led researchers to consider the possibility of building an "electronic brain".
They developed several areas of research that would become part of AI, such as McCulloch and Pitts design for "artificial neurons" in 1943, and Turing's influential 1950 paper 'Computing Machinery and Intelligence', which introduced the Turing test and showed that "machine intelligence" was plausible.
The field of AI research was founded at a workshop at Dartmouth College in 1956.
The first AI program, Logic Theorist, was presented at the workshop, created by future Turing Award winner Allen Newell and future Nobel Laureate Herbert A.
Simon, in collaboration with J.
Many of the workshop attendees became the leaders of AI research in the 1960s.
They and their students produced programs that the press described as "astonishing": computers were learning checkers strategies, solving word problems in algebra, proving logical theorems and speaking English.
Artificial intelligence laboratories were set up at a number of British and U.
Researchers in the 1960s and the 1970s were convinced that their methods would eventually succeed in creating a machine with general intelligence and considered this the goal of their field.
In 1965 Herbert Simon predicted, "machines will be capable, within twenty years, of doing any work a man can do".
In 1967 Marvin Minsky agreed, writing that "within a generation .
They had, however, underestimated the difficulty of the problem.
Congress to fund more productive projects.
Minsky and Papert's book Perceptrons was understood as proving that artificial neural networks would never be useful for solving real-world tasks, thus discrediting the approach altogether.
The "AI winter", a period when obtaining funding for AI projects was difficult, followed.
In the early 1980s, AI research was revived by the commercial success of expert systems, a form of AI program that simulated the knowledge and analytical skills of human experts.
By 1985, the market for AI had reached over a billion dollars.
At the same time, Japan's fifth generation computer project inspired the U.
However, beginning with the collapse of the Lisp Machine market in 1987, AI once again fell into disrepute, and a second, longer-lasting winter began.
Up to this point, most of AI's funding had gone to projects that used high-level symbols to represent mental objects like plans, goals, beliefs, and known facts.
In the 1980s, some researchers began to doubt that this approach would be able to imitate all the processes of human cognition, especially perception, robotics, learning and pattern recognition, and began to look into "sub-symbolic" approaches.
Rodney Brooks rejected "representation" in general and focussed directly on engineering machines that move and survive.
Judea Pearl, Lotfi Zadeh, and others developed methods that handled incomplete and uncertain information by making reasonable guesses rather than precise logic.
But the most important development was the revival of "connectionism", including neural network research, by Geoffrey Hinton and others.
In 1990, Yann LeCun successfully showed that convolutional neural networks can recognize handwritten digits, the first of many successful applications of neural networks.
AI gradually restored its reputation in the late 1990s and early 21st century by exploiting formal mathematical methods and by finding specific solutions to specific problems.
This "narrow" and "formal" focus allowed researchers to produce verifiable results and collaborate with other fields (such as statistics, economics and mathematics).
By 2000, solutions developed by AI researchers were being widely used, although in the 1990s they were rarely described as "artificial intelligence" (a tendency known as the AI effect).
However, several academic researchers became concerned that AI was no longer pursuing its original goal of creating versatile, fully intelligent machines.
Beginning around 2002, they founded the subfield of artificial general intelligence (or "AGI"), which had several well-funded institutions by the 2010s.
Deep learning began to dominate industry benchmarks in 2012 and was adopted throughout the field.
For many specific tasks, other methods were abandoned.
Deep learning's success was based on both hardware improvements (faster computers, graphics processing units, cloud computing) and access to large amounts of data (including curated datasets, such as ImageNet).
Deep learning's success led to an enormous increase in interest and funding in AI.
The amount of machine learning research (measured by total publications) increased by 50% in the years 2015–2019.
In 2016, issues of fairness and the misuse of technology were catapulted into center stage at machine learning conferences, publications vastly increased, funding became available, and many researchers re-focussed their careers on these issues.
The alignment problem became a serious field of academic study.
In the late 2010s and early 2020s, AGI companies began to deliver programs that created enormous interest.
In 2015, AlphaGo, developed by DeepMind, beat the world champion Go player.
The program taught only the game's rules and developed a strategy by itself.
GPT-3 is a large language model that was released in 2020 by OpenAI and is capable of generating high-quality human-like text.
ChatGPT, launched on 30 November 2022, became the fastest-growing consumer software application in history, gaining over 100 million users in two months.
It marked what is widely regarded as AI's breakout year, bringing it into the public consciousness.
These programs, and others, inspired an aggressive AI boom, where large companies began investing billions of dollars in AI research.
According to AI Impacts, about US$50 billion annually was invested in "AI" around 2022 in the U.
Computer Science PhD graduates have specialized in "AI".
About 800,000 "AI"-related U.
According to PitchBook research, 22% of newly funded startups in 2024 claimed to be AI companies.
Philosophical debates have historically sought to determine the nature of intelligence and how to make intelligent machines.
Another major focus has been whether machines can be conscious, and the associated ethical implications.
Many other topics in philosophy are relevant to AI, such as epistemology and free will.
Rapid advancements have intensified public discussions on the philosophy and ethics of AI.
Alan Turing investigated whether machines can show intelligent behaviour and think.
In 1950, he proposed the Turing test, which measures the ability of a machine to simulate human conversation.
Since we can only observe the behavior of the machine, it does not matter if it is "actually" thinking or literally has a "mind".
Turing notes that we can not determine these things about other people but "it is usual to have a polite convention that everyone thinks.
Russell and Norvig agree with Turing that intelligence must be defined in terms of external behavior, not internal structure.
However, they are critical that the test requires the machine to imitate humans.
McCarthy defines intelligence as "the computational part of the ability to achieve goals in the world".
Another AI founder, Marvin Minsky, similarly describes it as "the ability to solve hard problems".
Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach defines it as the study of agents that perceive their environment and take actions that maximize their chances of achieving defined goals.
The many differing definitions of AI have been critically analyzed.
During the 2020s AI boom, the term has been used as a marketing buzzword to promote products and services which do not use AI.
The International Organization for Standardization describes an AI system as a "an engineered system that generates outputs such as content, forecasts, recommendations, or decisions for a given set of human‑defined objectives, and can operate with varying levels of automation".
The EU AI Act defines an AI system as "a machine-based system that is designed to operate with varying levels of autonomy and that may exhibit adaptiveness after deployment, and that, for explicit or implicit objectives, infers, from the input it receives, how to generate outputs such as predictions, content, recommendations, or decisions that can influence physical or virtual environments".
In the United States, influential but non‑binding guidance such as the National Institute of Standards and Technology's AI Risk Management Framework describes an AI system as "an engineered or machine-based system that can, for a given set of objectives, generate outputs such as predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual environments.
AI systems are designed to operate with varying levels of autonomy".
No established unifying theory or paradigm has guided AI research for most of its history.
The unprecedented success of statistical machine learning in the 2010s eclipsed all other approaches (so much so that some sources, especially in the business world, use the term "artificial intelligence" to mean "machine learning with neural networks").
This approach is mostly sub-symbolic, soft and narrow.
Critics argue that these questions may have to be revisited by future generations of AI researchers.
Symbolic AI (or "GOFAI") simulated the high-level conscious reasoning that people use when they solve puzzles, express legal reasoning and do mathematics.
They were highly successful at "intelligent" tasks such as algebra or IQ tests.
In the 1960s, Newell and Simon proposed the physical symbol systems hypothesis: "A physical symbol system has the necessary and sufficient means of general intelligent action.
However, the symbolic approach failed on many tasks that humans solve easily, such as learning, recognizing an object or commonsense reasoning.
Moravec's paradox is the discovery that high-level "intelligent" tasks were easy for AI, but low level "instinctive" tasks were extremely difficult.
Philosopher Hubert Dreyfus had argued since the 1960s that human expertise depends on unconscious instinct rather than conscious symbol manipulation, and on having a "feel" for the situation, rather than explicit symbolic knowledge.
Although his arguments had been ridiculed and ignored when they were first presented, eventually, AI research came to agree with him.
The issue is not resolved: sub-symbolic reasoning can make many of the same inscrutable mistakes that human intuition does, such as algorithmic bias.
Critics such as Noam Chomsky argue continuing research into symbolic AI will still be necessary to attain general intelligence, in part because sub-symbolic AI is a move away from explainable AI: it can be difficult or impossible to understand why a modern statistical AI program made a particular decision.
The emerging field of neuro-symbolic artificial intelligence attempts to bridge the two approaches.
Neats defend their programs with theoretical rigor, scruffies rely mainly on incremental testing to see if they work.
This issue was actively discussed in the 1970s and 1980s, but eventually was seen as irrelevant.
Modern AI has elements of both.
Finding a provably correct or optimal solution is intractable for many important problems.
Soft computing is a set of techniques, including genetic algorithms, fuzzy logic and neural networks, that are tolerant of imprecision, uncertainty, partial truth and approximation.
Soft computing was introduced in the late 1980s and most successful AI programs in the 21st century are examples of soft computing with neural networks.
AI researchers are divided as to whether to pursue the goals of artificial general intelligence and superintelligence directly or to solve as many specific problems as possible (narrow AI) in hopes these solutions will lead indirectly to the field's long-term goals.
General intelligence is difficult to define and difficult to measure, and modern AI has had more verifiable successes by focusing on specific problems with specific solutions.
The sub-field of artificial general intelligence studies this area exclusively.
There is no settled consensus in philosophy of mind on whether a machine can have a mind, consciousness and mental states in the same sense that human beings do.
This issue considers the internal experiences of the machine, rather than its external behavior.
Mainstream AI research considers this issue irrelevant because it does not affect the goals of the field: to build machines that can solve problems using intelligence.
Russell and Norvig add that "[t]he additional project of making a machine conscious in exactly the way humans are is not one that we are equipped to take on.
It is also typically the central question at issue in artificial intelligence in fiction.
David Chalmers identified two problems in understanding the mind, which he named the "hard" and "easy" problems of consciousness.
The easy problem is understanding how the brain processes signals, makes plans and controls behavior.
The hard problem is explaining how this feels or why it should feel like anything at all, assuming we are right in thinking that it truly does feel like something (Dennett's consciousness illusionism says this is an illusion).
While human information processing is easy to explain, human subjective experience is difficult to explain.
For example, it is easy to imagine a color-blind person who has learned to identify which objects in their field of view are red, but it is not clear what would be required for the person to know what red looks like.
Computationalism is the position in the philosophy of mind that the human mind is an information processing system and that thinking is a form of computing.
Computationalism argues that the relationship between mind and body is similar or identical to the relationship between software and hardware and thus may be a solution to the mind–body problem.
This philosophical position was inspired by the work of AI researchers and cognitive scientists in the 1960s and was originally proposed by philosophers Jerry Fodor and Hilary Putnam.
Philosopher John Searle characterized this position as "strong AI": "The appropriately programmed computer with the right inputs and outputs would thereby have a mind in exactly the same sense human beings have minds.
It is difficult or impossible to reliably evaluate whether an advanced AI is sentient (has the ability to feel), and if so, to what degree.
But if there is a significant chance that a given machine can feel and suffer, then it may be entitled to certain rights or welfare protection measures, similarly to animals.
Sapience (a set of capacities related to high intelligence, such as discernment or self-awareness) may provide another moral basis for AI rights.
Robot rights are also sometimes proposed as a practical way to integrate autonomous agents into society.
In 2017, the European Union considered granting "electronic personhood" to some of the most capable AI systems.
Similarly to the legal status of companies, it would have conferred rights but also responsibilities.
Critics argued in 2018 that granting rights to AI systems would downplay the importance of human rights, and that legislation should focus on user needs rather than speculative futuristic scenarios.
They also noted that robots lacked the autonomy to take part in society on their own.
Progress in AI increased interest in the topic.
Proponents of AI welfare and rights often argue that AI sentience, if it emerges, would be particularly easy to deny.
They warn that this may be a moral blind spot analogous to slavery or factory farming, which could lead to large-scale suffering if sentient AI is created and carelessly exploited.
A superintelligence is a hypothetical agent that would possess intelligence far surpassing that of the brightest and most gifted human mind.
If research into artificial general intelligence produced sufficiently intelligent software, it might be able to reprogram and improve itself.
The improved software would be even better at improving itself, leading to what I.
Good called an "intelligence explosion" and Vernor Vinge called a "singularity".
However, technologies cannot improve exponentially indefinitely, and typically follow an S-shaped curve, slowing when they reach the physical limits of what the technology can do.
Robot designer Hans Moravec, cyberneticist Kevin Warwick and inventor Ray Kurzweil have predicted that humans and machines may merge in the future into cyborgs that are more capable and powerful than either.
This idea, called transhumanism, has roots in the writings of Aldous Huxley and Robert Ettinger.
Edward Fredkin argues that "artificial intelligence is the next step in evolution", an idea first proposed by Samuel Butler's "Darwin among the Machines" as far back as 1863, and expanded upon by George Dyson in his 1998 book Darwin Among the Machines: The Evolution of Global Intelligence.
Thought-capable artificial beings have appeared as storytelling devices since antiquity, and have been a persistent theme in science fiction.
A common trope in these works began with Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, where a human creation becomes a threat to its masters.
This includes such works as Arthur C.
Clarke's and Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey (both 1968), with HAL 9000, the murderous computer in charge of the Discovery One spaceship, as well as Blade Runner (1982), The Terminator (1984) and The Matrix (1999).
In contrast, the rare loyal robots such as Gort from The Day the Earth Stood Still (1951) and Bishop from Aliens (1986) are less prominent in popular culture.
Isaac Asimov introduced the Three Laws of Robotics in many stories, most notably with the "Multivac" super-intelligent computer.
Asimov's laws are often brought up during lay discussions of machine ethics; while almost all artificial intelligence researchers are familiar with Asimov's laws through popular culture, they generally consider the laws useless for many reasons, one of which is their ambiguity.
Several works use AI to force us to confront the fundamental question of what makes us human, showing us artificial beings that have the ability to feel, and thus to suffer.
This appears in Karel Čapek's R.
Artificial Intelligence and Ex Machina, as well as the novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?
Dick considers the idea that our understanding of human subjectivity is altered by technology created with artificial intelligence.
In Fieser, James; Dowden, Bradley (eds.
Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Metallurgy is a domain of materials science and engineering that studies the physical and chemical behavior of metallic elements, their inter-metallic compounds, and their mixtures, which are known as alloys.
Metallurgy encompasses both the science and the technology of metals, including their production and the engineering of metal components used in products for both consumers and manufacturers.
Metallurgy is distinct from the craft of metalworking by providing it with a scientific foundation, much as medical science supports the practice of medicine.
A specialist practitioner of metallurgy is known as a metallurgist.
The science of metallurgy is further subdivided into two broad categories: chemical metallurgy and physical metallurgy.
Chemical metallurgy is chiefly concerned with the reduction and oxidation of metals, and the chemical performance of metals.
Subjects of study in chemical metallurgy include mineral processing, the extraction of metals, thermodynamics, electrochemistry, and chemical degradation (corrosion).
In contrast, physical metallurgy focuses on the mechanical properties of metals, the physical properties of metals, and the physical performance of metals.
Topics studied in physical metallurgy include crystallography, material characterization, mechanical metallurgy, phase transformations, and failure mechanisms.
Historically, metallurgy has predominantly focused on the production of metals.
Metal production begins with the processing of ores to extract the metal, and includes the mixture of metals to make alloys.
Metal alloys are often a blend of two or more metallic elements.
However, non-metallic elements are often added to alloys in order to achieve properties suitable for an application.
The study of metal production is subdivided into ferrous metallurgy (also known as black metallurgy) and non-ferrous metallurgy, also known as colored metallurgy.
Ferrous metallurgy involves processes and alloys based on iron, while non-ferrous metallurgy involves processes and alloys based on other metals.
The production of ferrous metals accounts for 95% of world metal production.
Modern metallurgists work in both emerging and traditional areas as part of an interdisciplinary team alongside material scientists and other engineers.
Some traditional areas include mineral processing, metal production, heat treatment, failure analysis, and the joining of metals (including welding, brazing, and soldering).
Emerging areas for metallurgists include nanotechnology, superconductors, composites, biomedical materials, electronic materials (semiconductors) and surface engineering.
Metallurgy derives from the Ancient Greek μεταλλουργός, metallourgós, "worker in metal", from μέταλλον, métallon, "mine, metal" + ἔργον, érgon, "work" The word was originally an alchemist's term for the extraction of metals from minerals, the ending -urgy signifying a process, especially manufacturing; it was discussed in this sense in the 1797 Encyclopædia Britannica.
In the late 19th century, metallurgy's definition was extended to the more general scientific study of metals, alloys, and related processes.
In English, the pronunciation is the more common one in the United Kingdom while pronunciation is the more common one in the United States and is the first-listed variant in various American dictionaries, including Merriam-Webster Collegiate and American Heritage.
The earliest metal employed by humans appears to be gold, which can be found "native".
Small amounts of natural gold, dating to the late Paleolithic period, 40,000 BCE, have been found in Spanish caves.
Silver, copper, tin and meteoric iron can also be found in native form, allowing a limited amount of metalworking in early cultures.
Early cold metallurgy, using native copper that was not smelted from ore has been documented at sites in Anatolia and at the site of Tell Maghzaliyah in Iraq, dating from the 7th~6th millennia BCE.
The earliest archaeological support of smelting (hot metallurgy) in Eurasia is found in the Balkans and Carpathian Mountains, as evidenced by findings of objects made by metal casting and smelting dated to around 6,200 ~ 5,000 BCE, with the invention of copper metallurgy.
Certain metals, such as tin, lead, and copper can be recovered from their ores by simply heating the rocks in a comparatively moderate-temperature fire or blast furnace in a process known as smelting.
The first evidence of copper smelting, dating from the 6th millennium BCE, has been found at archaeological sites in Majdanpek, Jarmovac, and Pločnik, in present-day Serbia.
The site of Pločnik has produced a smelted copper axe dating from 5,500 BCE, belonging to the Vinča culture.
The Balkans and adjacent Carpathian region were the location of major Chalcolithic cultures including Vinča, Varna, Karanovo, Gumelnița and Hamangia, which are often grouped together under the name of 'Old Europe'.
With the Carpatho-Balkan region described as the 'earliest metallurgical province in Eurasia', its scale and technical quality of metal production in the 6th~5th millennia BCE totally overshadowed that of any other contemporary production centre.
The earliest documented use of lead (possibly native or smelted) in the Near East dates from the 6th millennium BCE, is from the late Neolithic settlements of Yarim Tepe and Arpachiyah in Iraq.
The artifacts suggest that lead smelting may have predated copper smelting.
Metallurgy of lead has also been found in the Balkans during the same period.
Copper smelting is documented at sites in Anatolia and at the site of Tal-i Iblis in southeastern Iran from c.
Copper smelting is first documented in the Delta region of northern Egypt in c.
This represents the earliest evidence for smelting in Africa.
The Varna Necropolis, Bulgaria, is a burial site located in the western industrial zone of Varna, approximately 4 km from the city centre, internationally considered one of the key archaeological sites in world prehistory.
The oldest gold treasure in the world, dating from 4,600 BC – 4,200 BCE, was discovered at Varna.
The gold piece dating from 4,500 BCE, found in 2019 in Durankulak, near Varna is another important example.
Other signs of early metals are found from the 3rd millennium BCE in Palmela, Portugal, Los Millares, Spain, and Stonehenge, United Kingdom.
The precise beginnings, however, have not been clearly ascertained and new discoveries are both continuous and ongoing.
In approximately 1,900 BCE, ancient iron smelting sites existed in Tamil Nadu.
In the Near East, about 3,500 BCE, it was discovered that the superior metal bronze could be made by combining copper and tin.
This represented a major technological shift known as the Bronze Age.
The extraction of iron from its ore into a workable metal is much more difficult than for copper or tin.
The process appears to have been invented by the Hittites in about 1,200 BCE, beginning the Iron Age.
The ability to extract and work iron was a key factor in the success of the Philistines.
Historical developments in ferrous metallurgy can be found in a wide variety of past cultures and civilizations.
This includes the ancient and medieval kingdoms and empires of the Middle East and Near East, ancient Iran, ancient Egypt, ancient Nubia, and Anatolia in present-day Turkey, Ancient Nok, Carthage, the Celts, Greeks and Romans of ancient Europe, medieval Europe, ancient and medieval China, ancient and medieval India, ancient and medieval Japan, amongst others.
Wootz process was developed and practiced in the Indian subcontinent as early as 300 BCE—although certainly by 200 BCE—high quality steel was being produced in southern India, by what Europeans would later call the crucible technique.
Golconda steel, also called Wootz steel is an ultra-high carbon steel, with a natural inclusion of carbide forming Vanadium (~0.
Archaeological and Tamil language literary evidence suggests that this manufacturing process was already in existence in South India well before the common era, with wootz steel exported from the Chera dynasty and called Seric Iron in Rome, and later known as Damascus steel in Europe.
Reproduction research undertaken by Prof.
D Verhoeven and Al Pendray identified the role of impurities within the local ore, in carbide formation, and repeated thermal cycling of blades, in the pattern creation, and reproduced Wootz steel blades with patterns microscopically and visually identical to ancient blade patterns.
A 16th century book by Georg Agricola, De re metallica, describes the highly developed and complex processes of mining metal ores, metal extraction, and metallurgy of the time.
Agricola has been described as the "father of metallurgy".
Extractive metallurgy is the practice of removing valuable metals from an ore and refining the extracted raw metals into a purer form.
In order to convert a metal oxide or sulphide to a purer metal, the ore must be reduced physically, chemically, or electrolytically.
Extractive metallurgists are interested in three primary streams: feed, concentrate (metal oxide/sulphide) and tailings (waste).
After mining, large pieces of the ore feed are broken through crushing or grinding in order to obtain particles small enough, where each particle is either mostly valuable or mostly waste.
Concentrating the particles of value in a form supporting separation enables the desired metal to be removed from waste products.
Mining may not be necessary, if the ore body and physical environment are conducive to leaching.
Leaching dissolves minerals in an ore body and results in an enriched solution.
The solution is collected and processed to extract valuable metals.
Ore bodies often contain more than one valuable metal.
Tailings of a previous process may be used as a feed in another process to extract a secondary product from the original ore.
Additionally, a concentrate may contain more than one valuable metal.
That concentrate would then be processed to separate the valuable metals into individual constituents.
Much effort has been placed on understanding the iron–carbon alloy system, which includes steels and cast irons.
Plain carbon steels (those that contain essentially only carbon as an alloying element) are used in low-cost, high-strength applications, where neither weight nor corrosion are a major concern.
Cast irons, including ductile iron, are also part of the iron-carbon system.
Iron-Manganese-Chromium alloys (Hadfield-type steels) are also used in non-magnetic applications such as directional drilling.
Other engineering metals include aluminium, chromium, copper, magnesium, nickel, titanium, zinc, and silicon.
These metals are most often used as alloys with the noted exception of silicon, which is not a metal.
Stainless steel, particularly Austenitic stainless steels, galvanized steel, nickel alloys, titanium alloys, or occasionally copper alloys are used where resistance to corrosion is important.
Aluminium alloys and magnesium alloys are commonly used when a lightweight strong part is required such as in automotive and aerospace applications.
Copper-nickel alloys (such as Monel) are used in highly corrosive environments and for non-magnetic applications.
Nickel-based superalloys like Inconel are used in high-temperature applications such as gas turbines, turbochargers, pressure vessels, and heat exchangers.
For extremely high temperatures, single crystal alloys are used to minimize creep.
In modern electronics, high purity single crystal silicon is essential for metal-oxide-silicon transistors (MOS) and integrated circuits.
In production engineering, metallurgy is concerned with the production of metallic components for use in consumer or engineering products.
This involves production of alloys, shaping, heat treatment and surface treatment of product.
The metallurgist's task is to achieve balance between material properties, such as cost, weight, strength, toughness, hardness, corrosion, fatigue resistance and performance in temperature extremes.
To achieve this goal, the operating environment must be carefully considered.
Hardness testing (using scales such as Rockwell, Vickers, and Brinell) is a common practice for characterizing a metal's elasticity and plasticity In a saltwater environment, most ferrous metals and some non-ferrous alloys corrode quickly.
Metals exposed to cold or cryogenic conditions may undergo a ductile to brittle transition and lose their toughness, becoming more brittle and prone to cracking.
Metals under continual cyclic loading can suffer from metal fatigue.
Metals under constant stress at elevated temperatures can creep.
Casting – molten metal is poured into a shaped mold.
Variants of casting include sand casting, investment casting, also called the lost wax process, die casting, centrifugal casting, both vertical and horizontal, and continuous castings.
Each of these forms has advantages for certain metals and applications considering factors like magnetism and corrosion.
Forging – a red-hot billet is hammered into shape.
Rolling – a billet is passed through successively narrower rollers to create a sheet.
Extrusion – a hot and malleable metal is forced under pressure through a die, which shapes it before it cools.
Machining – lathes, milling machines and drills cut the cold metal to shape.
Sintering – a powdered metal is heated in a non-oxidizing environment after being compressed into a die.
Fabrication – sheets of metal are cut with guillotines or gas cutters and bent and welded into structural shape.
Laser cladding – metallic powder is blown through a movable laser beam (e.
The resulting melted metal reaches a substrate to form a melt pool.
By moving the laser head, it is possible to stack the tracks and build up a three-dimensional piece.
Cold-working processes, in which the product's shape is altered by rolling, fabrication or other processes, while the product is cold, can increase the strength of the product by a process called work hardening.
Work hardening creates microscopic defects in the metal, which resist further changes of shape.
Metals can be heat-treated to alter the properties of strength, ductility, toughness, hardness and resistance to corrosion.
Annealing process softens the metal by heating it and then allowing it to cool very slowly, which gets rid of stresses in the metal and makes the grain structure large and soft-edged so that, when the metal is hit or stressed it dents or perhaps bends, rather than breaking; it is also easier to sand, grind, or cut annealed metal.
Quenching is the process of cooling metal very quickly after heating, thus "freezing" the metal's molecules in the very hard martensite form, which makes the metal harder.
Tempering relieves stresses in the metal that were caused by the hardening process; tempering makes the metal less hard while making it better able to sustain impacts without breaking.
Often, mechanical and thermal treatments are combined in what are known as thermo-mechanical treatments for better properties and more efficient processing of materials.
These processes are common to high-alloy special steels, superalloys and titanium alloys.
Electroplating is a chemical surface-treatment technique.
It involves bonding a thin layer of another metal such as gold, silver, chromium or zinc to the surface of the product.
This is done by selecting the coating material electrolyte solution, which is the material that is going to coat the workpiece (gold, silver, zinc).
There needs to be two electrodes of different materials: one the same material as the coating material and one that is receiving the coating material.
Two electrodes are electrically charged and the coating material is stuck to the work piece.
It is used to reduce corrosion as well as to improve the product's aesthetic appearance.
It is also used to make inexpensive metals look like the more expensive ones (gold, silver).
Shot peening is a cold working process used to finish metal parts.
In the process of shot peening, small round shot is blasted against the surface of the part to be finished.
This process is used to prolong the product life of the part, prevent stress corrosion failures, and also prevent fatigue.
The shot leaves small dimples on the surface like a peen hammer does, which cause compression stress under the dimple.
As the shot media strikes the material over and over, it forms many overlapping dimples throughout the piece being treated.
The compression stress in the surface of the material strengthens the part and makes it more resistant to fatigue failure, stress failures, corrosion failure, and cracking.
Thermal spraying techniques are another popular finishing option, and often have better high temperature properties than electroplated coatings.
Thermal spraying, also known as a spray welding process, is an industrial coating process that consists of a heat source (flame or other) and a coating material; the coating can be in a powder or wire form, either of which is melted and then sprayed at a high velocity onto the surface of the material being treated.
The spray treating process is known by many different names such as HVOF (high velocity oxygen fuel), plasma spray, flame spray, arc spray and metalizing.
Electroless deposition (ED) or electroless plating is defined as the autocatalytic process, through which metals and metal alloys are deposited onto nonconductive surfaces.
These nonconductive surfaces include plastics, ceramics, glass, etc.
Electroless deposition is a chemical processes that create metal coatings on various materials by autocatalytic chemical reduction of metal cations in a liquid bath.
Metallurgists study the microscopic and macroscopic structure of metals using metallography, a technique invented by Henry Clifton Sorby.
In metallography, an alloy of interest is ground flat and polished to a mirror finish.
The sample can then be etched to reveal the microstructure and macrostructure of the metal.
The sample is then examined in an optical or electron microscope, and the image contrast provides details on the composition, mechanical properties, and processing history.
Crystallography, often using diffraction of X-rays or electrons, is another valuable tool available to the modern metallurgist.
Crystallography allows identification of unknown materials and reveals the crystal structure of the sample.
Quantitative crystallography can be used to calculate the amount of phases present as well as the degree of strain to which a sample has been subjected.
Current advanced characterization techniques, which are used frequently in this field are: Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) and atom-probe tomography (APT).
Philosophy (from Ancient Greek philosophía lit.
It is a rational and critical inquiry that reflects on its methods and assumptions.
Historically, many of the individual sciences, such as physics and psychology, formed part of philosophy.
However, they are considered separate academic disciplines in the modern sense of the term.
Influential traditions in the history of philosophy include Western, Arabic–Persian, Indian, and Chinese philosophy.
Western philosophy originated in Ancient Greece and covers a wide area of philosophical subfields.
A central topic in Arabic–Persian philosophy is the relation between reason and revelation.
Indian philosophy combines the spiritual problem of how to reach enlightenment with the exploration of the nature of reality and the ways of arriving at knowledge.
Chinese philosophy focuses principally on practical issues about right social conduct, government, and self-cultivation.
Major branches of philosophy are epistemology, ethics, logic, and metaphysics.
Epistemology studies what knowledge is and how to acquire it.
Ethics investigates moral principles and what constitutes right conduct.
Logic is the study of correct reasoning and explores how good arguments can be distinguished from bad ones.
Metaphysics examines the most general features of reality, existence, objects, and properties.
Other subfields are aesthetics, philosophy of language, philosophy of mind, philosophy of religion, philosophy of science, philosophy of mathematics, philosophy of history, and political philosophy.
Within each branch, there are competing schools of philosophy that promote different principles, theories, or methods.
Philosophers use a great variety of methods to arrive at philosophical knowledge.
They include conceptual analysis, reliance on common sense and intuitions, use of thought experiments, analysis of ordinary language, description of experience, and critical questioning.
Philosophy is related to many other fields, such as the natural and social sciences, mathematics, business, law, and journalism.
It provides an interdisciplinary perspective and studies the scope and fundamental concepts of these fields.
It also investigates their methods and ethical implications.
The word philosophy comes from the Ancient Greek words φίλος (philos) 'love' and σοφία (sophia) 'wisdom'.
Some sources say that the term was coined by the pre-Socratic philosopher Pythagoras, but this is not certain.
The word entered the English language primarily from Old French and Anglo-Norman starting around 1175 CE.
The French philosophie is itself a borrowing from the Latin philosophia.
The term philosophy acquired the meanings of "advanced study of the speculative subjects (logic, ethics, physics, and metaphysics)", "deep wisdom consisting of love of truth and virtuous living", "profound learning as transmitted by the ancient writers", and "the study of the fundamental nature of knowledge, reality, and existence, and the basic limits of human understanding".
Before the modern age, the term philosophy was used in a wide sense.
It included most forms of rational inquiry, such as the individual sciences, as its subdisciplines.
For instance, natural philosophy was a major branch of philosophy.
This branch of philosophy encompassed a wide range of fields, including disciplines like physics, chemistry, and biology.
An example of this usage is the 1687 book Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica by Isaac Newton.
This book referred to natural philosophy in its title, but it is today considered a book of physics.
The meaning of philosophy changed toward the end of the modern period when it acquired the more narrow meaning common today.
In this new sense, the term is mainly associated with disciplines like metaphysics, epistemology, and ethics.
Among other topics, it covers the rational study of reality, knowledge, and values.
It is distinguished from other disciplines of rational inquiry such as the empirical sciences and mathematics.
The practice of philosophy is characterized by several general features: it is a form of rational inquiry, it aims to be systematic, and it tends to critically reflect on its own methods and presuppositions.
It requires attentively thinking long and carefully about the provocative, vexing, and enduring problems central to the human condition.
The philosophical pursuit of wisdom involves asking general and fundamental questions.
It often does not result in straightforward answers but may help a person to better understand the topic, examine their life, dispel confusion, and overcome prejudices and self-deceptive ideas associated with common sense.
For example, Socrates stated that "the unexamined life is not worth living" to highlight the role of philosophical inquiry in understanding one's own existence.
And according to Bertrand Russell, "the man who has no tincture of philosophy goes through life imprisoned in the prejudices derived from common sense, from the habitual beliefs of his age or his nation, and from convictions which have grown up in his mind without the cooperation or consent of his deliberate reason.
Attempts to provide more precise definitions of philosophy are controversial and are studied in metaphilosophy.
Some approaches argue that there is a set of essential features shared by all parts of philosophy.
Others see only weaker family resemblances or contend that it is merely an empty blanket term.
Precise definitions are often only accepted by theorists belonging to a certain philosophical movement and are revisionistic according to Søren Overgaard et al.
Some definitions characterize philosophy in relation to its method, like pure reasoning.
Others focus on its topic, for example, as the study of the biggest patterns of the world as a whole or as the attempt to answer the big questions.
Such an approach is pursued by Immanuel Kant, who holds that the task of philosophy is united by four questions: "What can I know?
Many definitions of philosophy emphasize its intimate relation to science.
In this sense, philosophy is sometimes understood as a proper science in its own right.
According to some naturalistic philosophers, such as W.
Quine, philosophy is an empirical yet abstract science that is concerned with wide-ranging empirical patterns instead of particular observations.
Science-based definitions usually face the problem of explaining why philosophy in its long history has not progressed to the same extent or in the same way as the sciences.
This problem is avoided by seeing philosophy as an immature or provisional science whose subdisciplines cease to be philosophy once they have fully developed.
In this sense, philosophy is sometimes described as "the midwife of the sciences".
Other definitions focus on the contrast between science and philosophy.
A common theme among many such conceptions is that philosophy is concerned with meaning, understanding, or the clarification of language.
According to one view, philosophy is conceptual analysis, which involves finding the necessary and sufficient conditions for the application of concepts.
Another definition characterizes philosophy as thinking about thinking to emphasize its self-critical, reflective nature.
A further approach presents philosophy as a linguistic therapy.
According to Ludwig Wittgenstein, for instance, philosophy aims at dispelling misunderstandings to which humans are susceptible due to the confusing structure of ordinary language.
Phenomenologists, such as Edmund Husserl, characterize philosophy as a "rigorous science" investigating essences.
They practice a radical suspension of theoretical assumptions about reality to get back to the "things themselves", that is, as originally given in experience.
They contend that this base-level of experience provides the foundation for higher-order theoretical knowledge, and that one needs to understand the former to understand the latter.
An early approach found in ancient Greek and Roman philosophy is that philosophy is the spiritual practice of developing one's rational capacities.
This practice is an expression of the philosopher's love of wisdom and has the aim of improving one's well-being by leading a reflective life.
For example, the Stoics saw philosophy as an exercise to train the mind and thereby achieve eudaimonia and flourish in life.
As a discipline, the history of philosophy aims to provide a systematic and chronological exposition of philosophical concepts and doctrines.
Some theorists see it as a part of intellectual history, but it also investigates questions not covered by intellectual history such as whether the theories of past philosophers are true and have remained philosophically relevant.
The history of philosophy is primarily concerned with theories based on rational inquiry and argumentation; some historians understand it in a looser sense that includes myths, religious teachings, and proverbial lore.
Influential traditions in the history of philosophy include Western, Arabic–Persian, Indian, and Chinese philosophy.
Other philosophical traditions are Japanese philosophy, Latin American philosophy, and African philosophy.
Western philosophy originated in Ancient Greece in the 6th century BCE with the pre-Socratics.
They attempted to provide rational explanations of the cosmos as a whole.
The philosophy following them was shaped by Socrates (469–399 BCE), Plato (427–347 BCE), and Aristotle (384–322 BCE).
They expanded the range of topics to questions like how people should act, how to arrive at knowledge, and what the nature of reality and mind is.
The later part of the ancient period was marked by the emergence of philosophical movements, for example, Epicureanism, Stoicism, Skepticism, and Neoplatonism.
The medieval period started in the 5th century CE.
Its focus was on religious topics and many thinkers used ancient philosophy to explain and further elaborate Christian doctrines.
The Renaissance period started in the 14th century and saw a renewed interest in schools of ancient philosophy, in particular Platonism.
Humanism also emerged in this period.
The modern period started in the 17th century.
One of its central concerns was how philosophical and scientific knowledge are created.
Specific importance was given to the role of reason and sensory experience.
Many of these innovations were used in the Enlightenment movement to challenge traditional authorities.
Several attempts to develop comprehensive systems of philosophy were made in the 19th century, for instance, by German idealism and Marxism.
Influential developments in 20th-century philosophy were the emergence and application of formal logic, the focus on the role of language as well as pragmatism, and movements in continental philosophy like phenomenology, existentialism, and post-structuralism.
The 20th century saw a rapid expansion of academic philosophy in terms of the number of philosophical publications and philosophers working at academic institutions.
There was also a noticeable growth in the number of female philosophers, but they still remained underrepresented.
Arabic–Persian philosophy arose in the early 9th century CE as a response to discussions in the Islamic theological tradition.
Its classical period lasted until the 12th century CE and was strongly influenced by ancient Greek philosophers.
It employed their ideas to elaborate and interpret the teachings of the Quran.
Al-Kindi (801–873 CE) is usually regarded as the first philosopher of this tradition.
He translated and interpreted many works of Aristotle and Neoplatonists in his attempt to show that there is a harmony between reason and faith.
Avicenna (980–1037 CE) also followed this goal and developed a comprehensive philosophical system to provide a rational understanding of reality encompassing science, religion, and mysticism.
Al-Ghazali (1058–1111 CE) was a strong critic of the idea that reason can arrive at a true understanding of reality and God.
He formulated a detailed critique of philosophy and tried to assign philosophy a more limited place besides the teachings of the Quran and mystical insight.
Following Al-Ghazali and the end of the classical period, the influence of philosophical inquiry waned.
Mulla Sadra (1571–1636 CE) is often regarded as one of the most influential philosophers of the subsequent period.
The increasing influence of Western thought and institutions in the 19th and 20th centuries gave rise to the intellectual movement of Islamic modernism, which aims to understand the relation between traditional Islamic beliefs and modernity.
One of the distinguishing features of Indian philosophy is that it integrates the exploration of the nature of reality, the ways of arriving at knowledge, and the spiritual question of how to reach enlightenment.
It started around 900 BCE when the Vedas were written.
They are the foundational scriptures of Hinduism and contemplate issues concerning the relation between the self and ultimate reality as well as the question of how souls are reborn based on their past actions.
This period also saw the emergence of non-Vedic teachings, like Buddhism and Jainism.
Buddhism was founded by Gautama Siddhartha (563–483 BCE), who challenged the Vedic idea of a permanent self and proposed a path to liberate oneself from suffering.
Jainism was founded by Mahavira (599–527 BCE), who emphasized non-violence as well as respect toward all forms of life.
The subsequent classical period started roughly 200 BCE and was characterized by the emergence of the six orthodox schools of Hinduism: Nyāyá, Vaiśeṣika, Sāṃkhya, Yoga, Mīmāṃsā, and Vedanta.
The school of Advaita Vedanta developed later in this period.
It was systematized by Adi Shankara (c.
A slightly different perspective was defended by Ramanuja (1017–1137 CE), who founded the school of Vishishtadvaita Vedanta and argued that individual entities are real as aspects or parts of the underlying unity.
He also helped to popularize the Bhakti movement, which taught devotion toward the divine as a spiritual path and lasted until the 17th to 18th centuries CE.
The modern period began roughly 1800 CE and was shaped by encounters with Western thought.
Philosophers tried to formulate comprehensive systems to harmonize diverse philosophical and religious teachings.
For example, Swami Vivekananda (1863–1902 CE) used the teachings of Advaita Vedanta to argue that all the different religions are valid paths toward the one divine.
Chinese philosophy is particularly interested in practical questions associated with right social conduct, government, and self-cultivation.
Many schools of thought emerged in the 6th century BCE in competing attempts to resolve the political turbulence of that period.
The most prominent among them were Confucianism and Daoism.
Confucianism was founded by Confucius (551–479 BCE).
It focused on different forms of moral virtues and explored how they lead to harmony in society.
Daoism was founded by Laozi (6th century BCE) and examined how humans can live in harmony with nature by following the Dao or the natural order of the universe.
Other influential early schools of thought were Mohism, which developed an early form of altruistic consequentialism, and Legalism, which emphasized the importance of a strong state and strict laws.
Buddhism was introduced to China in the 1st century CE and diversified into new forms of Buddhism.
Starting in the 3rd century CE, the school of Xuanxue emerged.
It interpreted earlier Daoist works with a specific emphasis on metaphysical explanations.
Neo-Confucianism developed in the 11th century CE.
It systematized previous Confucian teachings and sought a metaphysical foundation of ethics.
The modern period in Chinese philosophy began in the early 20th century and was shaped by the influence of and reactions to Western philosophy.
The emergence of Chinese Marxism—which focused on class struggle, socialism, and communism—resulted in a significant transformation of the political landscape.
Another development was the emergence of New Confucianism, which aims to modernize and rethink Confucian teachings to explore their compatibility with democratic ideals and modern science.
Traditional Japanese philosophy assimilated and synthesized ideas from different traditions, including the indigenous Shinto religion and Chinese and Indian thought in the forms of Confucianism and Buddhism, both of which entered Japan in the 6th and 7th centuries.
Its practice is characterized by active interaction with reality rather than disengaged examination.
Neo-Confucianism became an influential school of thought in the 16th century and the following Edo period and prompted a greater focus on language and the natural world.
The Kyoto School emerged in the 20th century and integrated Eastern spirituality with Western philosophy in its exploration of concepts like absolute nothingness (zettai-mu), place (basho), and the self.
Latin American philosophy in the pre-colonial period was practiced by indigenous civilizations and explored questions concerning the nature of reality and the role of humans.
It has similarities to indigenous North American philosophy, which covered themes such as the interconnectedness of all things.
Latin American philosophy during the colonial period, starting around 1550, was dominated by religious philosophy in the form of scholasticism.
Influential topics in the post-colonial period were positivism, the philosophy of liberation, and the exploration of identity and culture.
Early African philosophy was primarily conducted and transmitted orally.
It focused on community, morality, and ancestral ideas, encompassing folklore, wise sayings, religious ideas, and philosophical concepts like Ubuntu.
Systematic African philosophy emerged at the beginning of the 20th century.
It discusses topics such as ethnophilosophy, négritude, pan-Africanism, Marxism, postcolonialism, the role of cultural identity, relativism, African epistemology, and the critique of Eurocentrism.
Philosophical questions can be grouped into several branches.
These groupings allow philosophers to focus on a set of similar topics and interact with other thinkers who are interested in the same questions.
Epistemology, ethics, logic, and metaphysics are sometimes listed as the main branches.
There are many other subfields besides them and the different divisions are neither exhaustive nor mutually exclusive.
For example, political philosophy, ethics, and aesthetics are sometimes linked under the general heading of value theory as they investigate normative or evaluative aspects.
Furthermore, philosophical inquiry sometimes overlaps with other disciplines in the natural and social sciences, religion, and mathematics.
Epistemology is the branch of philosophy that studies knowledge.
It is also known as theory of knowledge and aims to understand what knowledge is, how it arises, what its limits are, and what value it has.
It further examines the nature of truth, belief, justification, and rationality.
Some of the questions addressed by epistemologists include "By what method(s) can one acquire knowledge?
Epistemology is primarily interested in declarative knowledge or knowledge of facts, like knowing that Princess Diana died in 1997.
But it also investigates practical knowledge, such as knowing how to ride a bicycle, and knowledge by acquaintance, for example, knowing a celebrity personally.
One area in epistemology is the analysis of knowledge.
It assumes that declarative knowledge is a combination of different parts and attempts to identify what those parts are.
An influential theory in this area claims that knowledge has three components: it is a belief that is justified and true.
This theory is controversial and the difficulties associated with it are known as the Gettier problem.
Alternative views state that knowledge requires additional components, like the absence of luck; different components, like the manifestation of cognitive virtues instead of justification; or they deny that knowledge can be analyzed in terms of other phenomena.
Another area in epistemology asks how people acquire knowledge.
Often-discussed sources of knowledge are perception, introspection, memory, inference, and testimony.
According to empiricists, all knowledge is based on some form of experience.
Rationalists reject this view and hold that some forms of knowledge, like innate knowledge, are not acquired through experience.
The regress problem is a common issue in relation to the sources of knowledge and the justification they offer.
It is based on the idea that beliefs require some kind of reason or evidence to be justified.
The problem is that the source of justification may itself be in need of another source of justification.
This leads to an infinite regress or circular reasoning.
Foundationalists avoid this conclusion by arguing that some sources can provide justification without requiring justification themselves.
Another solution is presented by coherentists, who state that a belief is justified if it coheres with other beliefs of the person.
Many discussions in epistemology touch on the topic of philosophical skepticism, which raises doubts about some or all claims to knowledge.
These doubts are often based on the idea that knowledge requires absolute certainty and that humans are unable to acquire it.
Ethics, also known as moral philosophy, studies what constitutes right conduct.
It is also concerned with the moral evaluation of character traits and institutions.
It explores what the standards of morality are and how to live a good life.
Philosophical ethics addresses such basic questions as "Are moral obligations relative?
The main branches of ethics are meta-ethics, normative ethics, and applied ethics.
Meta-ethics asks abstract questions about the nature and sources of morality.
It analyzes the meaning of ethical concepts, like right action and obligation.
It also investigates whether ethical theories can be true in an absolute sense and how to acquire knowledge of them.
Normative ethics encompasses general theories of how to distinguish between right and wrong conduct.
It helps guide moral decisions by examining what moral obligations and rights people have.
Applied ethics studies the consequences of the general theories developed by normative ethics in specific situations, for example, in the workplace or for medical treatments.
Within contemporary normative ethics, consequentialism, deontology, and virtue ethics are influential schools of thought.
Consequentialists judge actions based on their consequences.
One such view is utilitarianism, which argues that actions should increase overall happiness while minimizing suffering.
Deontologists judge actions based on whether they follow moral duties, such as abstaining from lying or killing.
According to them, what matters is that actions are in tune with those duties and not what consequences they have.
Virtue theorists judge actions based on how the moral character of the agent is expressed.
According to this view, actions should conform to what an ideally virtuous agent would do by manifesting virtues like generosity and honesty.
Logic is the study of correct reasoning.
It aims to understand how to distinguish good from bad arguments.
It is usually divided into formal and informal logic.
Formal logic uses artificial languages with a precise symbolic representation to investigate arguments.
In its search for exact criteria, it examines the structure of arguments to determine whether they are correct or incorrect.
Informal logic uses non-formal criteria and standards to assess the correctness of arguments.
It relies on additional factors such as content and context.
Logic examines a variety of arguments.
Deductive arguments are mainly studied by formal logic.
An argument is deductively valid if the truth of its premises ensures the truth of its conclusion.
Deductively valid arguments follow a rule of inference, like modus ponens, which has the following logical form: "p; if p then q; therefore q".
An example is the argument "today is Sunday; if today is Sunday then I don't have to go to work today; therefore I don't have to go to work today".
The premises of non-deductive arguments also support their conclusion, although this support does not guarantee that the conclusion is true.
One form is inductive reasoning.
It starts from a set of individual cases and uses generalization to arrive at a universal law governing all cases.
An example is the inference that "all ravens are black" based on observations of many individual black ravens.
Another form is abductive reasoning.
It starts from an observation and concludes that the best explanation of this observation must be true.
This happens, for example, when a doctor diagnoses a disease based on the observed symptoms.
Logic also investigates incorrect forms of reasoning.
They are called fallacies and are divided into formal and informal fallacies based on whether the source of the error lies only in the form of the argument or also in its content and context.
Metaphysics is the study of the most general features of reality, such as existence, objects and their properties, wholes and their parts, space and time, events, and causation.
There are disagreements about the precise definition of the term and its meaning has changed throughout the ages.
Metaphysicians attempt to answer basic questions including "Why is there something rather than nothing?
Metaphysics is sometimes divided into general metaphysics and specific or special metaphysics.
General metaphysics investigates being as such.
It examines the features that all entities have in common.
Specific metaphysics is interested in different kinds of being, the features they have, and how they differ from one another.
An important area in metaphysics is ontology.
Some theorists identify it with general metaphysics.
Ontology investigates concepts like being, becoming, and reality.
It studies the categories of being and asks what exists on the most fundamental level.
Another subfield of metaphysics is philosophical cosmology.
It is interested in the essence of the world as a whole.
It asks questions including whether the universe has a beginning and an end and whether it was created by something else.
A key topic in metaphysics concerns the question of whether reality only consists of physical things like matter and energy.
Alternative suggestions are that mental entities (such as souls and experiences) and abstract entities (such as numbers) exist apart from physical things.
Another topic in metaphysics concerns the problem of identity.
One question is how much an entity can change while still remaining the same entity.
According to one view, entities have essential and accidental features.
They can change their accidental features but they cease to be the same entity if they lose an essential feature.
A central distinction in metaphysics is between particulars and universals.
Universals, like the color red, can exist at different locations at the same time.
This is not the case for particulars including individual persons or specific objects.
Other metaphysical questions are whether the past fully determines the present and what implications this would have for the existence of free will.
There are many other subfields of philosophy besides its core branches.
Some of the most prominent are aesthetics, philosophy of language, philosophy of mind, philosophy of religion, philosophy of science, and political philosophy.
Aesthetics in the philosophical sense is the field that studies the nature and appreciation of beauty and other aesthetic properties, like the sublime.
Although it is often treated together with the philosophy of art, aesthetics is a broader category that encompasses other aspects of experience, such as natural beauty.
In a more general sense, aesthetics is "critical reflection on art, culture, and nature".
A key question in aesthetics is whether beauty is an objective feature of entities or a subjective aspect of experience.
Aesthetic philosophers also investigate the nature of aesthetic experiences and judgments.
Further topics include the essence of works of art and the processes involved in creating them.
The philosophy of language studies the nature and function of language.
It examines the concepts of meaning, reference, and truth.
It aims to answer questions such as how words are related to things and how language affects human thought and understanding.
It is closely related to the disciplines of logic and linguistics.
The philosophy of language rose to particular prominence in the early 20th century in analytic philosophy due to the works of Frege and Russell.
One of its central topics is to understand how sentences get their meaning.
There are two broad theoretical camps: those emphasizing the formal truth conditions of sentences and those investigating circumstances that determine when it is suitable to use a sentence, the latter of which is associated with speech act theory.
The philosophy of mind studies the nature of mental phenomena and how they are related to the physical world.
It aims to understand different types of conscious and unconscious mental states, like beliefs, desires, intentions, feelings, sensations, and free will.
An influential intuition in the philosophy of mind is that there is a distinction between the inner experience of objects and their existence in the external world.
The mind-body problem is the problem of explaining how these two types of thing—mind and matter—are related.
The main traditional responses are materialism, which assumes that matter is more fundamental; idealism, which assumes that mind is more fundamental; and dualism, which assumes that mind and matter are distinct types of entities.
In contemporary philosophy, another common view is functionalism, which understands mental states in terms of the functional or causal roles they play.
The mind-body problem is closely related to the hard problem of consciousness, which asks how the physical brain can produce qualitatively subjective experiences.
The philosophy of religion investigates the basic concepts, assumptions, and arguments associated with religion.
It critically reflects on what religion is, how to define the divine, and whether one or more gods exist.
It also includes the discussion of worldviews that reject religious doctrines.
Further questions addressed by the philosophy of religion are: "How are we to interpret religious language, if not literally?
It differs from theology since theological debates typically take place within one religious tradition, whereas debates in the philosophy of religion transcend any particular set of theological assumptions.
The philosophy of science examines the fundamental concepts, assumptions, and problems associated with science.
It reflects on what science is and how to distinguish it from pseudoscience.
It investigates the methods employed by scientists, how their application can result in knowledge, and on what assumptions they are based.
It also studies the purpose and implications of science.
Some of its questions are "What counts as an adequate explanation?
How these branches are related to one another is also a question in the philosophy of science.
Many of its philosophical issues overlap with the fields of metaphysics or epistemology.
Political philosophy is the philosophical inquiry into the fundamental principles and ideas governing political systems and societies.
It examines the basic concepts, assumptions, and arguments in the field of politics.
It investigates the nature and purpose of government and compares its different forms.
It further asks under what circumstances the use of political power is legitimate, rather than a form of simple violence.
In this regard, it is concerned with the distribution of political power, social and material goods, and legal rights.
Other topics are justice, liberty, equality, sovereignty, and nationalism.
Political philosophy involves a general inquiry into normative matters and differs in this respect from political science, which aims to provide empirical descriptions of actually existing states.
Political philosophy is often treated as a subfield of ethics.
Influential schools of thought in political philosophy are liberalism, conservativism, socialism, and anarchism.
Methods of philosophy are ways of conducting philosophical inquiry.
They include techniques for arriving at philosophical knowledge and justifying philosophical claims as well as principles used for choosing between competing theories.
A great variety of methods have been employed throughout the history of philosophy.
Many of them differ significantly from the methods used in the natural sciences in that they do not use experimental data obtained through measuring equipment.
The choice of one's method usually has important implications both for how philosophical theories are constructed and for the arguments cited for or against them.
This choice is often guided by epistemological considerations about what constitutes philosophical evidence.
Methodological disagreements can cause conflicts among philosophical theories or about the answers to philosophical questions.
The discovery of new methods has often had important consequences both for how philosophers conduct their research and for what claims they defend.
Some philosophers engage in most of their theorizing using one particular method while others employ a wider range of methods based on which one fits the specific problem investigated best.
Conceptual analysis is a common method in analytic philosophy.
It aims to clarify the meaning of concepts by analyzing them into their component parts.
Another method often employed in analytic philosophy is based on common sense.
It starts with commonly accepted beliefs and tries to draw unexpected conclusions from them, which it often employs in a negative sense to criticize philosophical theories that are too far removed from how the average person sees the issue.
It is similar to how ordinary language philosophy approaches philosophical questions by investigating how ordinary language is used.
Various methods in philosophy give particular importance to intuitions, that is, non-inferential impressions about the correctness of specific claims or general principles.
For example, they play an important role in thought experiments, which employ counterfactual thinking to evaluate the possible consequences of an imagined situation.
These anticipated consequences can then be used to confirm or refute philosophical theories.
The method of reflective equilibrium also employs intuitions.
It seeks to form a coherent position on a certain issue by examining all the relevant beliefs and intuitions, some of which often have to be deemphasized or reformulated to arrive at a coherent perspective.
Pragmatists stress the significance of concrete practical consequences for assessing whether a philosophical theory is true.
According to the pragmatic maxim as formulated by Charles Sanders Peirce, the idea a person has of an object is nothing more than the totality of practical consequences they associate with this object.
Pragmatists have also used this method to expose disagreements as merely verbal, that is, to show they make no genuine difference on the level of consequences.
Phenomenologists seek knowledge of the realm of appearance and the structure of human experience.
They insist upon the first-personal character of all experience and proceed by suspending theoretical judgments about the external world.
This technique of phenomenological reduction is known as "bracketing" or epoché.
The goal is to give an unbiased description of the appearance of things.
Methodological naturalism places great emphasis on the empirical approach and the resulting theories found in the natural sciences.
In this way, it contrasts with methodologies that give more weight to pure reasoning and introspection.
Philosophy is closely related to many other fields.
It is sometimes understood as a meta-discipline that clarifies the nature and limits of other disciplines.
It does this by critically examining their basic concepts, background assumptions, and methods.
In this regard, it plays a key role in providing an interdisciplinary perspective.
It bridges the gap between different disciplines by analyzing which concepts and problems they have in common.
It shows how they overlap while also delimiting their scope.
Historically, most of the individual sciences originated from philosophy.
The influence of philosophy is felt in several fields that require difficult practical decisions.
In medicine, philosophical considerations related to bioethics affect issues like whether an embryo is already a person and under what conditions abortion is morally permissible.
A closely related philosophical problem is how humans should treat other animals, for instance, whether it is acceptable to use non-human animals as food or for research experiments.
In relation to business and professional life, philosophy has contributed by providing ethical frameworks.
They contain guidelines on which business practices are morally acceptable and cover the issue of corporate social responsibility.
Philosophical inquiry is relevant to many fields that are concerned with what to believe and how to arrive at evidence for one's beliefs.
This is a key issue for the sciences, which have as one of their prime objectives the creation of scientific knowledge.
Scientific knowledge is based on empirical evidence but it is often not clear whether empirical observations are neutral or already include theoretical assumptions.
A closely connected problem is whether the available evidence is sufficient to decide between competing theories.
Epistemological problems in relation to the law include what counts as evidence and how much evidence is required to find a person guilty of a crime.
A related issue in journalism is how to ensure truth and objectivity when reporting on events.
In the fields of theology and religion, there are many doctrines associated with the existence and nature of God as well as rules governing correct behavior.
A key issue is whether a rational person should believe these doctrines, for example, whether revelation in the form of holy books and religious experiences of the divine are sufficient evidence for these beliefs.
Philosophy in the form of logic has been influential in the fields of mathematics and computer science.
Further fields influenced by philosophy include psychology, sociology, linguistics, education, and the arts.
The close relation between philosophy and other fields in the contemporary period is reflected in the fact that many philosophy graduates go on to work in related fields rather than in philosophy itself.
In the field of politics, philosophy addresses issues such as how to assess whether a government policy is just.
Philosophical ideas have prepared and shaped various political developments.
For example, ideals formulated in Enlightenment philosophy laid the foundation for constitutional democracy and played a role in the American Revolution and the French Revolution.
Marxist philosophy and its exposition of communism was one of the factors in the Russian Revolution and the Chinese Communist Revolution.
In India, Mahatma Gandhi's philosophy of non-violence shaped the Indian independence movement.
An example of the cultural and critical role of philosophy is found in its influence on the feminist movement through philosophers such as Mary Wollstonecraft, Simone de Beauvoir, and Judith Butler.
It has shaped the understanding of key concepts in feminism, for instance, the meaning of gender, how it differs from biological sex, and what role it plays in the formation of personal identity.
Philosophers have also investigated the concepts of justice and equality and their implications with respect to the prejudicial treatment of women in male-dominated societies.
The idea that philosophy is useful for many aspects of life and society is sometimes rejected.
According to some academics, philosophy is mainly undertaken for its own sake and does not make significant contributions to existing practices or external goals.
Ethics is the philosophical study of moral phenomena.
Also called moral philosophy, it investigates normative questions about what people ought to do or which behavior is morally right.
Its main branches include normative ethics, applied ethics, and metaethics.
Normative ethics aims to find general principles that govern how people should act.
Applied ethics examines concrete ethical problems in real-life situations, such as abortion, treatment of animals, and business practices.
Metaethics explores the underlying assumptions and concepts of ethics.
It asks whether there are objective moral facts, how moral knowledge is possible, and how moral judgments motivate people.
Influential normative theories are consequentialism, deontology, and virtue ethics.
According to consequentialists, an act is right if it leads to the best consequences.
Deontologists focus on acts themselves, saying that they must adhere to duties, like telling the truth and keeping promises.
Virtue ethics sees the manifestation of virtues, like courage and compassion, as the fundamental principle of morality.
Ethics is closely connected to value theory, which studies the nature and types of value, like the contrast between intrinsic and instrumental value.
Moral psychology is a related empirical field and investigates psychological processes involved in morality, such as reasoning and the formation of character.
Descriptive ethics describes the dominant moral codes and beliefs in different societies and considers their historical dimension.
The history of ethics started in the ancient period with the development of ethical principles and theories in ancient Egypt, India, China, and Greece.
This period saw the emergence of ethical teachings associated with Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, Daoism, and contributions of philosophers like Socrates and Aristotle.
During the medieval period, ethical thought was strongly influenced by religious teachings.
In the modern period, this focus shifted to a more secular approach concerned with moral experience, reasons for acting, and the consequences of actions.
An influential development in the 20th century was the emergence of metaethics.
Ethics, also called moral philosophy, is the study of moral phenomena.
It is one of the main branches of philosophy and investigates the nature of morality and the principles that govern the moral evaluation of conduct, character traits, and institutions.
It examines what obligations people have, what behavior is right and wrong, and how to lead a good life.
Some of its key questions are "How should one live?
In contemporary philosophy, ethics is usually divided into normative ethics, applied ethics, and metaethics.
Morality concerns what people ought to do rather than what they actually do, what they want to do, or what social conventions require.
As a rational and systematic field of inquiry, ethics studies practical reasons why people should act one way rather than another.
Most ethical theories seek universal principles that express a general standpoint of what is objectively right and wrong.
In a slightly different sense, the term ethics can also refer to individual ethical theories in the form of a rational system of moral principles, such as Aristotelian ethics, and to a moral code that certain societies, social groups, or professions follow, as in Protestant work ethic and medical ethics.
The English word ethics has its roots in the Ancient Greek word êthos (ἦθος), meaning 'character' and 'personal disposition'.
This word gave rise to the Ancient Greek word ēthikós (ἠθικός), which was translated into Latin as ethica and entered the English language in the 15th century through the Old French term éthique.
The term morality originates in the Latin word moralis, meaning 'manners' and 'character'.
It was introduced into the English language during the Middle English period through the Old French term moralité.
The terms ethics and morality are usually used interchangeably but some philosophers distinguish between the two.
According to one view, morality focuses on what moral obligations people have while ethics is broader and includes ideas about what is good and how to lead a meaningful life.
Another difference is that codes of conduct in specific areas, such as business and environment, are usually termed ethics rather than morality, as in business ethics and environmental ethics.
Normative ethics is the philosophical study of ethical conduct and investigates the fundamental principles of morality.
It aims to discover and justify general answers to questions like "How should one live?
For example, given the particular impression that it is wrong to set a child on fire for fun, normative ethics aims to find more general principles that explain why this is the case, like the principle that one should not cause extreme suffering to the innocent, which may itself be explained in terms of a more general principle.
Many theories of normative ethics also aim to guide behavior by helping people make moral decisions.
Theories in normative ethics state how people should act or what kind of behavior is correct.
They do not aim to describe how people normally act, what moral beliefs ordinary people have, how these beliefs change over time, or what ethical codes are upheld in certain social groups.
These topics belong to descriptive ethics and are studied in fields like anthropology, sociology, and history rather than normative ethics.
Some systems of normative ethics arrive at a single principle covering all possible cases.
Others encompass a small set of basic rules that address all or at least the most important moral considerations.
One difficulty for systems with several basic principles is that these principles may conflict with each other in some cases and lead to ethical dilemmas.
Distinct theories in normative ethics suggest different principles as the foundation of morality.
The three most influential schools of thought are consequentialism, deontology, and virtue ethics.
These schools are usually presented as exclusive alternatives, but depending on how they are defined, they can overlap and do not necessarily exclude one another.
In some cases, they differ in which acts they see as right or wrong.
In other cases, they recommend the same course of action but provide different justifications for why it is right.
Consequentialism, also called teleological ethics, says that morality depends on consequences.
According to the most common view, an act is right if it brings the best future.
This means that there is no alternative course of action that has better consequences.
A key aspect of consequentialist theories is that they provide a characterization of what is good and then define what is right in terms of what is good.
For example, classical utilitarianism says that pleasure is good and that the action leading to the most overall pleasure is right.
Consequentialism has been discussed indirectly since the formulation of classical utilitarianism in the late 18th century.
A more explicit analysis of this view happened in the 20th century, when the term was coined by G.
Consequentialists usually understand the consequences of an action in a very wide sense that includes the totality of its effects.
This is based on the idea that actions make a difference in the world by bringing about a causal chain of events that would not have existed otherwise.
A core intuition behind consequentialism is that the future should be shaped to achieve the best possible outcome.
The act itself is usually not seen as part of the consequences.
This means that if an act has intrinsic value or disvalue, it is not included as a factor.
Some consequentialists see this as a flaw, saying that all value-relevant factors need to be considered.
They try to avoid this complication by including the act itself as part of the consequences.
A related approach is to characterize consequentialism not in terms of consequences but in terms of outcome, with the outcome being defined as the act together with its consequences.
Most forms of consequentialism are agent-neutral.
This means that the value of consequences is assessed from a neutral perspective, that is, acts should have consequences that are good in general and not just good for the agent.
It is controversial whether agent-relative moral theories, like ethical egoism, should be considered as types of consequentialism.
There are many different types of consequentialism.
They differ based on what type of entity they evaluate, what consequences they take into consideration, and how they determine the value of consequences.
Most theories assess the moral value of acts.
However, consequentialism can also be used to evaluate motives, character traits, rules, and policies.
Many types assess the value of consequences based on whether they promote happiness or suffering.
But there are also alternative evaluative principles, such as desire satisfaction, autonomy, freedom, knowledge, friendship, beauty, and self-perfection.
Some forms of consequentialism hold that there is only a single source of value.
The most prominent among them is classical utilitarianism, which states that the moral value of acts only depends on the pleasure and suffering they cause.
An alternative approach says that there are many different sources of value, which all contribute to one overall value.
Before the 20th century, consequentialists were only concerned with the total of value or the aggregate good.
In the 20th century, alternative views were developed that additionally consider the distribution of value.
One of them states that an equal distribution of goods is better than an unequal distribution even if the aggregate good is the same.
There are disagreements about which consequences should be assessed.
An important distinction is between act consequentialism and rule consequentialism.
According to act consequentialism, the consequences of an act determine its moral value.
This means that there is a direct relation between the consequences of an act and its moral value.
Rule consequentialism, by contrast, holds that an act is right if it follows a certain set of rules.
Rule consequentialism determines the best rules by considering their outcomes at a community level.
People should follow the rules that lead to the best consequences when everyone in the community follows them.
This implies that the relation between an act and its consequences is indirect.
For example, if telling the truth is one of the best rules, then according to rule consequentialism, a person should tell the truth even in specific cases where lying would lead to better consequences.
Another disagreement is between actual and expected consequentialism.
According to the traditional view, only the actual consequences of an act affect its moral value.
One difficulty of this view is that many consequences cannot be known in advance.
This means that in some cases, even well-planned and intentioned acts are morally wrong if they inadvertently lead to negative outcomes.
An alternative perspective states that what matters are not the actual consequences but the expected consequences.
This view takes into account that when deciding what to do, people have to rely on their limited knowledge of the total consequences of their actions.
According to this view, a course of action has positive moral value despite leading to an overall negative outcome if it had the highest expected value, for example, because the negative outcome could not be anticipated or was unlikely.
A further difference is between maximizing and satisficing consequentialism.
According to maximizing consequentialism, only the best possible act is morally permitted.
This means that acts with positive consequences are wrong if there are alternatives with even better consequences.
One criticism of maximizing consequentialism is that it demands too much by requiring that people do significantly more than they are socially expected to.
For example, if the best action for someone with a good salary would be to donate 70% of their income to charity, it would be morally wrong for them to only donate 65%.
Satisficing consequentialism, by contrast, only requires that an act is "good enough" even if it is not the best possible alternative.
According to this view, it is possible to do more than one is morally required to do.
Mohism in ancient Chinese philosophy is one of the earliest forms of consequentialism.
It arose in the 5th century BCE and argued that political action should promote justice as a means to increase the welfare of the people.
The most well-known form of consequentialism is utilitarianism.
In its classical form, it is an act consequentialism that sees happiness as the only source of intrinsic value.
This means that an act is morally right if it produces "the greatest good for the greatest number" by increasing happiness and reducing suffering.
Utilitarians do not deny that other things also have value, like health, friendship, and knowledge.
However, they deny that these things have intrinsic value.
Instead, they say that they have extrinsic value because they affect happiness and suffering.
In this regard, they are desirable as a means but, unlike happiness, not as an end.
The view that pleasure is the only thing with intrinsic value is called ethical or evaluative hedonism.
Classical utilitarianism was initially formulated by Jeremy Bentham at the end of the 18th century and further developed by John Stuart Mill.
Bentham introduced the hedonic calculus to assess the value of consequences.
Two key aspects of the hedonic calculus are the intensity and the duration of pleasure.
According to this view, a pleasurable experience has a high value if it has a high intensity and lasts for a long time.
A common criticism of Bentham's utilitarianism argued that its focus on the intensity of pleasure promotes an immoral lifestyle centered around indulgence in sensory gratification.
Mill responded to this criticism by distinguishing between higher and lower pleasures.
He stated that higher pleasures, like the intellectual satisfaction of reading a book, are more valuable than lower pleasures, like the sensory enjoyment of food and drink, even if their intensity and duration are the same.
Since its original formulation, many variations of utilitarianism have developed, including the difference between act and rule utilitarianism and between maximizing and satisficing utilitarianism.
Deontology assesses the moral rightness of actions based on a set of norms or principles.
These norms describe the requirements that all actions need to follow.
They may include principles like telling the truth, keeping promises, and not intentionally harming others.
Unlike consequentialists, deontologists hold that the validity of general moral principles does not directly depend on their consequences.
They state that these principles should be followed in every case since they express how actions are inherently right or wrong.
According to moral philosopher David Ross, it is wrong to break a promise even if no harm comes from it.
Deontologists are interested in which actions are right and often allow that there is a gap between what is right and what is good.
Many focus on prohibitions and describe which acts are forbidden under any circumstances.
Agent-centered deontological theories focus on the person who acts and the duties they have.
Agent-centered theories often focus on the motives and intentions behind people's actions, highlighting the importance of acting for the right reasons.
They tend to be agent-relative, meaning that the reasons for which people should act depend on personal circumstances.
For example, a parent has a special obligation to their child, while a stranger does not have this kind of obligation toward a child they do not know.
Patient-centered theories, by contrast, focus on the people affected by actions and the rights they have.
An example is the requirement to treat other people as ends and not merely as a means to an end.
This requirement can be used to argue, for example, that it is wrong to kill a person against their will even if this act would save the lives of several others.
Patient-centered deontological theories are usually agent-neutral, meaning that they apply equally to everyone in a situation, regardless of their specific role or position.
Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) is one of the most well-known deontologists.
He states that reaching outcomes that people desire, such as being happy, is not the main purpose of moral actions.
Instead, he argues that there are universal principles that apply to everyone independent of their desires.
He uses the term categorical imperative for these principles, saying that they have their source in the structure of practical reason and are true for all rational agents.
According to Kant, to act morally is to act in agreement with reason as expressed by these principles while violating them is both immoral and irrational.
Kant provided several formulations of the categorical imperative.
One formulation says that a person should only follow maxims that can be universalized.
This means that the person would want everyone to follow the same maxim as a universal law applicable to everyone.
Another formulation states that one should treat other people always as ends in themselves and never as mere means to an end.
This formulation focuses on respecting and valuing other people for their own sake rather than using them in the pursuit of personal goals.
In either case, Kant says that what matters is to have a good will.
A person has a good will if they respect the moral law and form their intentions and motives in agreement with it.
Kant states that actions motivated in such a way are unconditionally good, meaning that they are good even in cases where they result in undesirable consequences.
Divine command theory says that God is the source of morality.
It states that moral laws are divine commands and that to act morally is to obey and follow God's will.
While all divine command theorists agree that morality depends on God, there are disagreements about the precise content of the divine commands, and theorists belonging to different religions tend to propose different moral laws.
For example, Christian and Jewish divine command theorists may argue that the Ten Commandments express God's will while Muslims may reserve this role for the teachings of the Quran.
Contractualists reject the reference to God as the source of morality and argue instead that morality is based on an explicit or implicit social contract between humans.
They state that actual or hypothetical consent to this contract is the source of moral norms and duties.
To determine which duties people have, contractualists often rely on a thought experiment about what rational people under ideal circumstances would agree on.
For example, if they would agree that people should not lie then there is a moral obligation to refrain from lying.
Because it relies on consent, contractualism is often understood as a patient-centered form of deontology.
Famous social contract theorists include Thomas Hobbes, John Locke, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and John Rawls.
Discourse ethics also focuses on social agreement on moral norms but says that this agreement is based on communicative rationality.
It aims to arrive at moral norms for pluralistic modern societies that encompass a diversity of viewpoints.
A universal moral norm is seen as valid if all rational discourse participants do or would approve.
This way, morality is not imposed by a single moral authority but arises from the moral discourse within society.
This discourse should aim to establish an ideal speech situation to ensure fairness and inclusivity.
In particular, this means that discourse participants are free to voice their different opinions without coercion but are at the same time required to justify them using rational argumentation.
The main concern of virtue ethics is how virtues are expressed in actions.
As such, it is neither directly interested in the consequences of actions nor in universal moral duties.
Virtues are positive character traits like honesty, courage, kindness, and compassion.
They are usually understood as dispositions to feel, decide, and act in a certain manner by being wholeheartedly committed to this manner.
Virtues contrast with vices, which are their harmful counterparts.
Virtue theorists usually say that the mere possession of virtues by itself is not sufficient.
Instead, people should manifest virtues in their actions.
An important factor is the practical wisdom, also called phronesis, of knowing when, how, and which virtue to express.
For example, a lack of practical wisdom may lead courageous people to perform morally wrong actions by taking unnecessary risks that should better be avoided.
Different types of virtue ethics differ on how they understand virtues and their role in practical life.
Eudaimonism is the original form of virtue theory developed in Ancient Greek philosophy and draws a close relation between virtuous behavior and happiness.
It states that people flourish by living a virtuous life.
Eudaimonist theories often hold that virtues are positive potentials residing in human nature and that actualizing these potentials results in leading a good and happy life.
Agent-based theories, by contrast, see happiness only as a side effect and focus instead on the admirable traits and motivational characteristics expressed while acting.
This is often combined with the idea that one can learn from exceptional individuals what those characteristics are.
Feminist ethics of care are another form of virtue ethics.
They emphasize the importance of interpersonal relationships and say that benevolence by caring for the well-being of others is one of the key virtues.
Influential schools of virtue ethics in ancient philosophy were Aristotelianism and Stoicism.
According to Aristotle (384–322 BCE), each virtue is a golden mean between two types of vices: excess and deficiency.
For example, courage is a virtue that lies between the deficient state of cowardice and the excessive state of recklessness.
Aristotle held that virtuous action leads to happiness and makes people flourish in life.
Stoicism emerged about 300 BCE and taught that, through virtue alone, people can achieve happiness characterized by a peaceful state of mind free from emotional disturbances.
The Stoics advocated rationality and self-mastery to achieve this state.
In the latter half of the 20th century, virtue ethics experienced a resurgence thanks to philosophers such as Elizabeth Anscombe, Philippa Foot, Alasdair MacIntyre, and Martha Nussbaum.
There are many other schools of normative ethics in addition to the three main traditions.
Pragmatist ethics focuses on the role of practice and holds that one of the key tasks of ethics is to solve practical problems in concrete situations.
It has certain similarities to utilitarianism and its focus on consequences but concentrates more on how morality is embedded in and relative to social and cultural contexts.
Pragmatists tend to give more importance to habits than to conscious deliberation and understand morality as a habit that should be shaped in the right way.
Postmodern ethics agrees with pragmatist ethics about the cultural relativity of morality.
It rejects the idea that there are objective moral principles that apply universally to all cultures and traditions.
It asserts that there is no one coherent ethical code since morality itself is irrational and humans are morally ambivalent beings.
Postmodern ethics instead focuses on how moral demands arise in specific situations as one encounters other people.
Ethical egoism is the view that people should act in their self-interest or that an action is morally right if the person acts for their own benefit.
It differs from psychological egoism, which states that people actually follow their self-interest without claiming that they should do so.
Ethical egoists may act in agreement with commonly accepted moral expectations and benefit other people, for example, by keeping promises, helping friends, and cooperating with others.
However, they do so only as a means to promote their self-interest.
Ethical egoism is often criticized as an immoral and contradictory position.
Normative ethics has a central place in most religions.
Key aspects of Jewish ethics are to follow the 613 commandments of God according to the Mitzvah duty found in the Torah and to take responsibility for societal welfare.
Christian ethics puts less emphasis on following precise laws and teaches instead the practice of selfless love, such as the Great Commandment to "Love your neighbor as yourself".
The Five Pillars of Islam constitute a basic framework of Muslim ethics and focus on the practice of faith, prayer, charity, fasting during Ramadan, and pilgrimage to Mecca.
Buddhists emphasize the importance of compassion and loving-kindness towards all sentient entities.
A similar outlook is found in Jainism, which has non-violence as its principal virtue.
Duty is a central aspect of Hindu ethics and is about fulfilling social obligations, which may vary depending on a person's social class and stage of life.
Confucianism places great emphasis on harmony in society and sees benevolence as a key virtue.
Taoism extends the importance of living in harmony to the whole world and teaches that people should practice effortless action by following the natural flow of the universe.
Indigenous belief systems, like Native American philosophy and the African Ubuntu philosophy, often emphasize the interconnectedness of all living beings and the environment while stressing the importance of living in harmony with nature.
Metaethics is the branch of ethics that examines the nature, foundations, and scope of moral judgments, concepts, and values.
It is not interested in which actions are right but in what it means for an action to be right and whether moral judgments are objective and can be true at all.
It further examines the meaning of morality and other moral terms.
Metaethics is a metatheory that operates on a higher level of abstraction than normative ethics by investigating its underlying assumptions.
Metaethical theories typically do not directly judge which normative ethical theories are correct.
However, metaethical theories can still influence normative theories by examining their foundational principles.
Metaethics overlaps with various branches of philosophy.
On the level of ontology, it examines whether there are objective moral facts.
Concerning semantics, it asks what the meaning of moral terms are and whether moral statements have a truth value.
The epistemological side of metaethics discusses whether and how people can acquire moral knowledge.
Metaethics overlaps with psychology because of its interest in how moral judgments motivate people to act.
It also overlaps with anthropology since it aims to explain how cross-cultural differences affect moral assessments.
Metaethics examines basic ethical concepts and their relations.
Ethics is primarily concerned with normative statements about what ought to be the case, in contrast to descriptive statements, which are about what is the case.
Duties and obligations express requirements of what people ought to do.
Duties are sometimes defined as counterparts of the rights that always accompany them.
According to this view, someone has a duty to benefit another person if this other person has the right to receive that benefit.
Obligation and permission are contrasting terms that can be defined through each other: to be obligated to do something means that one is not permitted not to do it and to be permitted to do something means that one is not obligated not to do it.
Some theorists define obligations in terms of values or what is good.
When used in a general sense, good contrasts with bad.
When describing people and their intentions, the term evil rather than bad is often employed.
Obligations are used to assess the moral status of actions, motives, and character traits.
An action is morally right if it is in tune with a person's obligations and morally wrong if it violates them.
Supererogation is a special moral status that applies to cases in which the agent does more than is morally required of them.
To be morally responsible for an action usually means that the person possesses and exercises certain capacities or some form of control.
If a person is morally responsible then it is appropriate to respond to them in certain ways, for example, by praising or blaming them.
A major debate in metaethics is about the ontological status of morality, questioning whether ethical values and principles are real.
It examines whether moral properties exist as objective features independent of the human mind and culture rather than as subjective constructs or expressions of personal preferences and cultural norms.
Moral realists accept the claim that there are objective moral facts.
This view implies that moral values are mind-independent aspects of reality and that there is an absolute fact about whether a given action is right or wrong.
A consequence of this view is that moral requirements have the same ontological status as non-moral facts: it is an objective fact whether there is an obligation to keep a promise just as it is an objective fact whether a thing is rectangular.
Moral realism is often associated with the claim that there are universal ethical principles that apply equally to everyone.
It implies that if two people disagree about a moral evaluation then at least one of them is wrong.
This observation is sometimes taken as an argument against moral realism since moral disagreement is widespread in most fields.
Moral relativists reject the idea that morality is an objective feature of reality.
They argue instead that moral principles are human inventions.
This means that a behavior is not objectively right or wrong but only subjectively right or wrong relative to a certain standpoint.
Moral standpoints may differ between persons, cultures, and historical periods.
For example, moral statements like "Slavery is wrong" or "Suicide is permissible" may be true in one culture and false in another.
Some moral relativists say that moral systems are constructed to serve certain goals such as social coordination.
According to this view, different societies and different social groups within a society construct different moral systems based on their diverging purposes.
Emotivism provides a different explanation, stating that morality arises from moral emotions, which are not the same for everyone.
Moral nihilists deny the existence of moral facts.
They reject the existence of both objective moral facts defended by moral realism and subjective moral facts defended by moral relativism.
They believe that the basic assumptions underlying moral claims are misguided.
Some moral nihilists conclude from this that anything is allowed.
A slightly different view emphasizes that moral nihilism is not itself a moral position about what is allowed and prohibited but the rejection of any moral position.
Moral nihilism, like moral relativism, recognizes that people judge actions as right or wrong from different perspectives.
However, it disagrees that this practice involves morality and sees it as just one type of human behavior.
A central disagreement among moral realists is between naturalism and non-naturalism.
Naturalism states that moral properties are natural properties accessible to empirical observation.
They are similar to the natural properties investigated by the natural sciences, like color and shape.
Some moral naturalists hold that moral properties are a unique and basic type of natural property.
Another view states that moral properties are real but not a fundamental part of reality and can be reduced to other natural properties, such as properties describing the causes of pleasure and pain.
Non-naturalism argues that moral properties form part of reality and that moral features are not identical or reducible to natural properties.
This view is usually motivated by the idea that moral properties are unique because they express what should be the case.
Proponents of this position often emphasize this uniqueness by claiming that it is a fallacy to define ethics in terms of natural entities or to infer prescriptive from descriptive statements.
The metaethical debate between cognitivism and non-cognitivism is about the meaning of moral statements and is a part of the study of semantics.
According to cognitivism, moral statements like "Abortion is morally wrong" and "Going to war is never morally justified" are truth-apt, meaning that they all have a truth value: they are either true or false.
Cognitivism claims that moral statements have a truth value but is not interested in which truth value they have.
It is often seen as the default position since moral statements resemble other statements, like "Abortion is a medical procedure" or "Going to war is a political decision", which have a truth value.
There is a close relation between the semantic theory of cognitivism and the ontological theory of moral realism.
Moral realists assert that moral facts exist.
This can be used to explain why moral statements are true or false: a statement is true if it is consistent with the facts and false otherwise.
As a result, philosophers who accept one theory often accept the other as well.
An exception is error theory, which combines cognitivism with moral nihilism by claiming that all moral statements are false because there are no moral facts.
Non-cognitivism is the view that moral statements lack a truth value.
According to this view, the statement "Murder is wrong" is neither true nor false.
Some non-cognitivists claim that moral statements have no meaning at all.
A different interpretation is that they have another type of meaning.
Emotivism says that they articulate emotional attitudes.
According to this view, the statement "Murder is wrong" expresses that the speaker has a negative moral attitude towards murder or disapproves of it.
Prescriptivism, by contrast, understands moral statements as commands.
According to this view, stating that "Murder is wrong" expresses a command like "Do not commit murder".
The epistemology of ethics studies whether or how one can know moral truths.
Foundationalist views state that some moral beliefs are basic and do not require further justification.
Ethical intuitionism is one such view that says that humans have a special cognitive faculty through which they can know right from wrong.
Intuitionists often argue that general moral truths, like "Lying is wrong", are self-evident and that it is possible to know them without relying on empirical experience.
A different foundationalist position focuses on particular observations rather than general intuitions.
It says that if people are confronted with a concrete moral situation, they can perceive whether right or wrong conduct was involved.
In contrast to foundationalists, coherentists say that there are no basic moral beliefs.
They argue that beliefs form a complex network and mutually support and justify one another.
According to this view, a moral belief can only amount to knowledge if it coheres with the rest of the beliefs in the network.
Moral skeptics say that people are unable to distinguish between right and wrong behavior, thereby rejecting the idea that moral knowledge is possible.
A common objection by critics of moral skepticism asserts that it leads to immoral behavior.
Thought experiments are used as a method in ethics to decide between competing theories.
They usually present an imagined situation involving an ethical dilemma and explore how people's intuitions of right and wrong change based on specific details in that situation.
For example, in Philippa Foot's trolley problem, a person can flip a switch to redirect a trolley from one track to another, thereby sacrificing the life of one person to save five.
This scenario explores how the difference between doing and allowing harm affects moral obligations.
Another thought experiment, proposed by Judith Jarvis Thomson, examines the moral implications of abortion by imagining a situation in which a person gets connected without their consent to an ill violinist.
In this scenario, the violinist dies if the connection is severed, similar to how a fetus dies in the case of abortion.
The thought experiment explores whether it would be morally permissible to sever the connection within the next nine months.
On the level of psychology, metaethics is interested in how moral beliefs and experiences affect behavior.
According to motivational internalists, there is a direct link between moral judgments and action.
This means that every judgment about what is right motivates the person to act accordingly.
For example, Socrates defends a strong form of motivational internalism by holding that a person can only perform an evil deed if they are unaware that it is evil.
Weaker forms of motivational internalism say that people can act against their own moral judgments, for example, because of the weakness of the will.
Motivational externalists accept that people can judge an act to be morally required without feeling a reason to engage in it.
This means that moral judgments do not always provide motivational force.
A closely related question is whether moral judgments can provide motivation on their own or need to be accompanied by other mental states, such as a desire to act morally.
Applied ethics, also known as practical ethics, is the branch of ethics and applied philosophy that examines concrete moral problems encountered in real-life situations.
Unlike normative ethics, it is not concerned with discovering or justifying universal ethical principles.
Instead, it studies how those principles can be applied to specific domains of practical life, what consequences they have in these fields, and whether additional domain-specific factors need to be considered.
One of the main challenges of applied ethics is to breach the gap between abstract universal theories and their application to concrete situations.
For example, an in-depth understanding of Kantianism or utilitarianism is usually not sufficient to decide how to analyze the moral implications of a medical procedure like abortion.
One reason is that it may not be clear how the Kantian requirement of respecting everyone's personhood applies to a fetus or, from a utilitarian perspective, what the long-term consequences are in terms of the greatest good for the greatest number.
This difficulty is particularly relevant to applied ethicists who employ a top-down methodology by starting from universal ethical principles and applying them to particular cases within a specific domain.
A different approach is to use a bottom-up methodology, known as casuistry.
This method does not start from universal principles but from moral intuitions about particular cases.
It seeks to arrive at moral principles relevant to a specific domain, which may not be applicable to other domains.
In either case, inquiry into applied ethics is often triggered by ethical dilemmas in which a person is subject to conflicting moral requirements.
Applied ethics covers issues belonging to both the private sphere, like right conduct in the family and close relationships, and the public sphere, like moral problems posed by new technologies and duties toward future generations.
Major branches include bioethics, business ethics, and professional ethics.
There are many other branches, and their domains of inquiry often overlap.
Bioethics covers moral problems associated with living organisms and biological disciplines.
A key problem in bioethics is how features such as consciousness, being able to feel pleasure and pain, rationality, and personhood affect the moral status of entities.
These differences concern, for example, how to treat non-living entities like rocks and non-sentient entities like plants in contrast to animals, and whether humans have a different moral status than other animals.
According to anthropocentrism, only humans have a basic moral status.
This suggests that all other entities possess a derivative moral status only insofar as they impact human life.
Sentientism, by contrast, extends an inherent moral status to all sentient beings.
Further positions include biocentrism, which also covers non-sentient lifeforms, and ecocentrism, which states that all of nature has a basic moral status.
Bioethics is relevant to various aspects of life and many professions.
It covers a wide range of moral problems associated with topics like abortion, cloning, stem cell research, euthanasia, suicide, animal testing, intensive animal farming, nuclear waste, and air pollution.
Bioethics can be divided into medical ethics, animal ethics, and environmental ethics based on whether the ethical problems relate to humans, other animals, or nature in general.
Medical ethics is the oldest branch of bioethics.
The Hippocratic Oath is one of the earliest texts to engage in medical ethics by establishing ethical guidelines for medical practitioners like a prohibition to harm the patient.
Medical ethics often addresses issues related to the start and end of life.
It examines the moral status of fetuses, for example, whether they are full-fledged persons and whether abortion is a form of murder.
Ethical issues also arise about whether a person has the right to end their life in cases of terminal illness or chronic suffering and if doctors may help them do so.
Other topics in medical ethics include medical confidentiality, informed consent, research on human beings, organ transplantation, and access to healthcare.
Animal ethics examines how humans should treat other animals.
This field often emphasizes the importance of animal welfare while arguing that humans should avoid or minimize the harm done to animals.
There is wide agreement that it is wrong to torture animals for fun.
The situation is more complicated in cases where harm is inflicted on animals as a side effect of the pursuit of human interests.
This happens, for example, during factory farming, when using animals as food, and for research experiments on animals.
A key topic in animal ethics is the formulation of animal rights.
Animal rights theorists assert that animals have a certain moral status and that humans should respect this status when interacting with them.
Examples of suggested animal rights include the right to life, the right to be free from unnecessary suffering, and the right to natural behavior in a suitable environment.
Environmental ethics deals with moral problems relating to the natural environment including animals, plants, natural resources, and ecosystems.
In its widest sense, it covers the whole cosmos.
In the domain of agriculture, this concerns the circumstances under which the vegetation of an area may be cleared to use it for farming and the implications of planting genetically modified crops.
On a wider scale, environmental ethics addresses the problem of global warming and people's responsibility on the individual and collective levels, including topics like climate justice and duties towards future generations.
Environmental ethicists often promote sustainable practices and policies directed at protecting and conserving ecosystems and biodiversity.
Business ethics examines the moral implications of business conduct and how ethical principles apply to corporations and organizations.
A key topic is corporate social responsibility, which is the responsibility of corporations to act in a manner that benefits society at large.
Corporate social responsibility is a complex issue since many stakeholders are directly and indirectly involved in corporate decisions, such as the CEO, the board of directors, and the shareholders.
A closely related topic is the question of whether corporations themselves, and not just their stakeholders, have moral agency.
Business ethics further examines the role of honesty and fairness in business practices as well as the moral implications of bribery, conflict of interest, protection of investors and consumers, worker's rights, ethical leadership, and corporate philanthropy.
Professional ethics is a closely related field that studies ethical principles applying to members of a specific profession, like engineers, medical doctors, lawyers, and teachers.
It is a diverse field since different professions often have different responsibilities.
Principles applying to many professions include that the professional has the required expertise for the intended work and that they have personal integrity and are trustworthy.
Further principles are to serve the interest of their target group, follow client confidentiality, and respect and uphold the client's rights, such as informed consent.
More precise requirements often vary between professions.
A cornerstone of engineering ethics is to protect public safety, health, and well-being.
Legal ethics emphasizes the importance of respect for justice, personal integrity, and confidentiality.
Key factors in journalism ethics include accuracy, truthfulness, independence, and impartiality as well as proper attribution to avoid plagiarism.
Many other fields of applied ethics are discussed in the academic literature.
Communication ethics covers moral principles of communicative conduct.
Two key issues in it are freedom of speech and speech responsibility.
Freedom of speech concerns the ability to articulate one's opinions and ideas without the threats of punishment and censorship.
Speech responsibility is about being accountable for the consequences of communicative action and inaction.
A closely related field is information ethics, which focuses on the moral implications of creating, controlling, disseminating, and using information.
The ethics of technology examines the moral issues associated with the creation and use of any artifact, from simple spears to high-tech computers and nanotechnology.
Central topics in the ethics of technology include the risks associated with creating new technologies, their responsible use, and questions about human enhancement through technological means, such as performance-enhancing drugs and genetic enhancement.
Important subfields include computer ethics, ethics of artificial intelligence, machine ethics, ethics of nanotechnology, and nuclear ethics.
The ethics of war investigates moral problems of war and violent conflicts.
According to just war theory, waging war is morally justified if it fulfills certain conditions.
These conditions are commonly divided into requirements concerning the cause to initiate violent activities, such as self-defense, and the way those violent activities are conducted, such as avoiding excessive harm to civilians in the pursuit of legitimate military targets.
Military ethics is a closely related field that is interested in the conduct of military personnel.
It governs questions of the circumstances under which they are permitted to kill enemies, destroy infrastructure, and put the lives of their own troops at risk.
Additional topics are the recruitment, training, and discharge of military personnel.
Other fields of applied ethics include political ethics, which examines the moral dimensions of political decisions, educational ethics, which covers ethical issues related to proper teaching practices, and sexual ethics, which addresses the moral implications of sexual behavior.
Value theory, also called axiology, is the philosophical study of value.
It examines the nature and types of value.
A central distinction is between intrinsic and instrumental value.
An entity has intrinsic value if it is good in itself or good for its own sake.
An entity has instrumental value if it is valuable as a means to something else, for example, by causing something that has intrinsic value.
Other topics include what kinds of things have value and how valuable they are.
Monist theories of value assert that there is only a single source of intrinsic value.
For instance, axiological hedonists say that pleasure is the only source of intrinsic value and that the magnitude of value corresponds to the degree of pleasure.
Axiological pluralists, by contrast, hold that there are different sources of intrinsic value, such as happiness, knowledge, and beauty.
There are disagreements about the exact relation between value theory and ethics.
Some philosophers characterize value theory as a subdiscipline of ethics while others see value theory as the broader term that encompasses other fields besides ethics, such as aesthetics and political philosophy.
A different characterization sees the two disciplines as overlapping but distinct fields.
The term axiological ethics is sometimes used for the discipline studying this overlap, that is, the part of ethics that studies values.
The two disciplines are sometimes distinguished based on their focus: ethics is about moral behavior or what is right while value theory is about value or what is good.
Some ethical theories, like consequentialism, stand very close to value theory by defining what is right in terms of what is good.
But this is not true for ethics in general and deontological theories tend to reject the idea that what is good can be used to define what is right.
Moral psychology explores the psychological foundations and processes involved in moral behavior.
It is an empirical science that studies how humans think and act in moral contexts.
It is interested in how moral reasoning and judgments take place, how moral character forms, what sensitivity people have to moral evaluations, and how people attribute and react to moral responsibility.
One of its key topics is moral development or the question of how morality develops on a psychological level from infancy to adulthood.
According to Lawrence Kohlberg, children go through different stages of moral development as they understand moral principles first as fixed rules governing reward and punishment, then as conventional social norms, and later as abstract principles of what is objectively right across societies.
A closely related question is whether and how people can be taught to act morally.
Evolutionary ethics, a closely related field, explores how evolutionary processes have shaped ethics.
One of its key ideas is that natural selection is responsible for moral behavior and moral sensitivity.
It interprets morality as an adaptation to evolutionary pressure that augments fitness by offering a selective advantage.
Altruism, for example, can provide benefits to group survival by improving cooperation.
Some theorists, like Mark Rowlands, argue that morality is not limited to humans, meaning that some non-human animals act based on moral emotions.
Others explore evolutionary precursors to morality in non-human animals.
Descriptive ethics, also called comparative ethics, studies existing moral codes, practices, and beliefs.
It investigates and compares moral phenomena in different societies and different groups within a society.
It aims to provide a value-neutral and empirical description without judging or justifying which practices are objectively right.
For instance, the question of how nurses think about the ethical implications of abortion belongs to descriptive ethics.
Another example is descriptive business ethics, which describes ethical standards in the context of business, including common practices, official policies, and employee opinions.
Descriptive ethics also has a historical dimension by exploring how moral practices and beliefs have changed over time.
Descriptive ethics is a multidisciplinary field that is covered by disciplines such as anthropology, sociology, psychology, and history.
Its empirical outlook contrasts with the philosophical inquiry into normative questions, such as which ethical principles are correct and how to justify them.
The history of ethics studies how moral philosophy has developed and evolved in the course of history.
It has its origin in ancient civilizations.
In ancient Egypt, the concept of Maat was used as an ethical principle to guide behavior and maintain order by emphasizing the importance of truth, balance, and harmony.
In ancient India starting in the 2nd millennium BCE, the Vedas and later Upanishads were composed as the foundational texts of Hindu philosophy and discussed the role of duty and the consequences of one's actions.
Buddhist ethics originated in ancient India between the 6th and 5th centuries BCE and advocated compassion, non-violence, and the pursuit of enlightenment.
Ancient China in the 6th century BCE saw the emergence of Confucianism, which focuses on moral conduct and self-cultivation by acting in agreement with virtues, and Daoism, which teaches that human behavior should be in harmony with the natural order of the universe.
In ancient Greece, Socrates (c.
According to Plato (c.
For Aristotle (384–322 BCE), a good life is associated with being happy by cultivating virtues and flourishing.
Starting in the 4th century BCE, the close relation between right action and happiness was also explored by the Hellenistic schools of Epicureanism, which recommended a simple lifestyle without indulging in sensory pleasures, and Stoicism, which advocated living in tune with reason and virtue while practicing self-mastery and becoming immune to disturbing emotions.
Ethical thought in the medieval period was strongly influenced by religious teachings.
Christian philosophers interpreted moral principles as divine commands originating from God.
Thomas Aquinas (1224–1274 CE) developed natural law ethics by claiming that ethical behavior consists in following the laws and order of nature, which he believed were created by God.
In the Islamic world, philosophers like Al-Farabi (c.
In medieval India, Hindu philosophers like Adi Shankara (c.
Moral philosophy in the modern period was characterized by a shift toward a secular approach to ethics.
Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679) identified self-interest as the primary drive of humans.
He concluded that it would lead to "a war of every man against every man" unless a social contract is established to avoid this outcome.
David Hume (1711–1776) thought that only moral sentiments, like empathy, can motivate ethical actions while he saw reason not as a motivating factor but only as what anticipates the consequences of possible actions.
Immanuel Kant (1724–1804), by contrast, saw reason as the source of morality.
He formulated a deontological theory, according to which the ethical value of actions depends on their conformity with moral laws independent of their outcome.
These laws take the form of categorical imperatives, which are universal requirements that apply to every situation.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770–1831) saw Kant's categorical imperative on its own as an empty formalism and emphasized the role of social institutions in providing concrete content to moral duties.
According to the Christian philosophy of Søren Kierkegaard (1813–1855), the demands of ethical duties are sometimes suspended when doing God's will.
Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900) formulated criticisms of both Christian and Kantian morality.
Another influential development in this period was the formulation of utilitarianism by Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832) and John Stuart Mill (1806–1873).
According to the utilitarian doctrine, actions should promote happiness while reducing suffering and the right action is the one that produces the greatest good for the greatest number of people.
An important development in 20th-century ethics in analytic philosophy was the emergence of metaethics.
Significant early contributions to this field were made by G.
Moore (1873–1958), who argued that moral values are essentially different from other properties found in the natural world.
Hare (1919–2002) followed this idea in formulating his prescriptivism, which states that moral statements are commands that, unlike regular judgments, are neither true nor false.
Mackie (1917–1981) suggested that every moral statement is false since there are no moral facts.
An influential argument for moral realism was made by Derek Parfit (1942–2017), who argued that morality concerns objective features of reality that give people reasons to act in one way or another.
Bernard Williams (1929–2003) agreed with the close relation between reasons and ethics but defended a subjective view instead that sees reasons as internal mental states that may or may not reflect external reality.
Another development in this period was the revival of ancient virtue ethics by philosophers like Philippa Foot (1920–2010).
In the field of political philosophy, John Rawls (1921–2002) relied on Kantian ethics to analyze social justice as a form of fairness.
In continental philosophy, phenomenologists such as Max Scheler (1874–1928) and Nicolai Hartmann (1882–1950) built ethical systems based on the claim that values have objective reality that can be investigated using the phenomenological method.
Existentialists like Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980) and Simone de Beauvoir (1908–1986), by contrast, held that values are created by humans and explored the consequences of this view in relation to individual freedom, responsibility, and authenticity.
This period also saw the emergence of feminist ethics, which questions traditional ethical assumptions associated with a male perspective and puts alternative concepts, like care, at the center.
Literature is any collection of written work.
The term is also used more narrowly for writings considered an art form, especially novels, plays, and poems.
It includes both print and digital writing.
In recent centuries, the definition has expanded to include oral literature, much of which has been transcribed.
Literature is a method of recording, preserving, and transmitting knowledge and entertainment.
It can also have a social, psychological, spiritual, or political role.
Literary criticism is one of the oldest academic disciplines, and is concerned with the literary merit or intellectual significance of specific texts.
The study of books and other texts as artifacts or traditions is instead encompassed by textual criticism or the history of the book.
Within this broader definition, literature includes non-fictional books, articles, or other written information on a particular subject.
Developments in print technology have allowed an ever-growing distribution and proliferation of written works, while the digital era has blurred the lines between online electronic literature and other forms of modern media.
Definitions of literature have varied over time.
In Western Europe, prior to the 18th century, literature denoted all books and writing.
It can be seen as returning to older, more inclusive notions, so that cultural studies, for instance, include, in addition to canonical works, popular and minority genres.
The word is also used in reference to non-written works: to "oral literature" and "the literature of preliterate culture".
Etymologically, the term derives from Latin literatura/litteratura, "learning, writing, grammar," originally "writing formed with letters," from litera/littera, "letter.
Literature is often referred to synecdochically as "writing," especially creative writing, and poetically as "the craft of writing" (or simply "the craft").
Syd Field described his discipline, screenwriting, as "a craft that occasionally rises to the level of art.
A value judgment definition of literature considers it as consisting solely of high quality writing that forms part of the belles-lettres ("fine writing") tradition.
An example of this is in the 1910–1911 Encyclopædia Britannica, which classified literature as "the best expression of the best thought reduced to writing".
The use of the term "literature" here poses some issues due to its origins in the Latin littera, "letter," essentially writing.
Alternatives such as "oral forms" and "oral genres" have been suggested, but the word literature is widely used.
Australian Aboriginal culture has thrived on oral traditions and oral histories passed down through tens of thousands of years.
In a study published in February 2020, new evidence showed that both Budj Bim and Tower Hill volcanoes erupted between 34,000 and 40,000 years ago.
Significantly, this is a "minimum age constraint for human presence in Victoria", and also could be interpreted as evidence for the oral histories of the Gunditjmara people, an Aboriginal Australian people of south-western Victoria, which tell of volcanic eruptions being some of the oldest oral traditions in existence.
An axe found underneath volcanic ash in 1947 had already proved that humans inhabited the region before the eruption of Tower Hill.
Oral literature is an ancient human tradition found in "all corners of the world.
The Judeo-Christian Bible reveals its oral traditional roots; medieval European manuscripts are penned by performing scribes; geometric vases from archaic Greece mirror Homer's oral style.
Rather, if the whole truth is told, oral tradition stands out as the single most dominant communicative technology of our species as both a historical fact and, in many areas still, a contemporary reality.
The earliest poetry is believed to have been recited or sung, employed as a way of remembering history, genealogy, and law.
In Asia, the transmission of folklore, mythologies as well as scriptures in ancient India, in different Indian religions, was by oral tradition, preserved with precision with the help of elaborate mnemonic techniques.
The early Buddhist texts are also generally believed to be of oral tradition, with the first by comparing inconsistencies in the transmitted versions of literature from various oral societies such as the Greek, Serbia and other cultures, then noting that the Vedic literature is too consistent and vast to have been composed and transmitted orally across generations, without being written down.
According to Goody, the Vedic texts likely involved both a written and oral tradition, calling it a "parallel products of a literate society".
All ancient Greek literature was to some degree oral in nature, and the earliest literature was completely so.
Homer's epic poetry, states Michael Gagarin, was largely composed, performed and transmitted orally.
As folklores and legends were performed in front of distant audiences, the singers would substitute the names in the stories with local characters or rulers to give the stories a local flavor and thus connect with the audience by making the historicity embedded in the oral tradition as unreliable.
The lack of surviving texts about the Greek and Roman religious traditions have led scholars to presume that these were ritualistic and transmitted as oral traditions, but some scholars disagree that the complex rituals in the ancient Greek and Roman civilizations were an exclusive product of an oral tradition.
Writing systems are not known to have existed among Native North Americans (north of Mesoamerica) before contact with Europeans.
Oral storytelling traditions flourished in a context without the use of writing to record and preserve history, scientific knowledge, and social practices.
While some stories were told for amusement and leisure, most functioned as practical lessons from tribal experience applied to immediate moral, social, psychological, and environmental issues.
Stories fuse fictional, supernatural, or otherwise exaggerated characters and circumstances with real emotions and morals as a means of teaching.
Plots often reflect real life situations and may be aimed at particular people known by the story's audience.
In this way, social pressure could be exerted without directly causing embarrassment or social exclusion.
For example, rather than yelling, Inuit parents might deter their children from wandering too close to the water's edge by telling a story about a sea monster with a pouch for children within its reach.
Oratory or the art of public speaking was considered a literary art for a significant period of time.
From ancient Greece to the late 19th century, rhetoric played a central role in Western education in training orators, lawyers, counselors, historians, statesmen, and poets.
Around the 4th millennium BC, the complexity of trade and administration in Mesopotamia outgrew human memory, and writing became a more dependable method of recording and presenting transactions in a permanent form.
Though in both ancient Egypt and Mesoamerica, writing may have already emerged because of the need to record historical and environmental events.
Subsequent innovations included more uniform, predictable legal systems, sacred texts, and the origins of modern practices of scientific inquiry and knowledge-consolidation, all largely reliant on portable and easily reproducible forms of writing.
Ancient Egyptian literature, along with Sumerian literature, are considered the world's oldest literatures.
The primary genres of the literature of ancient Egypt—didactic texts, hymns and prayers, and tales—were written almost entirely in verse; By the Old Kingdom (26th century BC to 22nd century BC), literary works included funerary texts, epistles and letters, hymns and poems, and commemorative autobiographical texts recounting the careers of prominent administrative officials.
It was not until the early Middle Kingdom (21st century BC to 17th century BC) that a narrative Egyptian literature was created.
Many works of early periods, even in narrative form, had a covert moral or didactic purpose, such as the Sanskrit Panchatantra (200 BC–300 AD), based on older oral tradition.
Drama and satire also developed as urban cultures, which provided a larger public audience, and later readership for literary production.
Lyric poetry (as opposed to epic poetry) was often the speciality of courts and aristocratic circles, particularly in East Asia where songs were collected by the Chinese aristocracy as poems, the most notable being the Shijing or Book of Songs (1046–c.
In ancient China, early literature was primarily focused on philosophy, historiography, military science, agriculture, and poetry.
China, the origin of modern paper making and woodblock printing, produced the world's first print cultures.
Much of Chinese literature originates with the Hundred Schools of Thought period that occurred during the Eastern Zhou dynasty (769–269 BC).
The most important of these include the Classics of Confucianism, of Daoism, of Mohism, of Legalism, as well as works of military science (e.
Sun Tzu's The Art of War, c.
Sima Qian's Records of the Grand Historian, c.
Ancient Chinese literature had a heavy emphasis on historiography, with often very detailed court records.
An exemplary piece of narrative history of ancient China was the Zuo Zhuan, which was compiled no later than 389 BC, and attributed to the blind 5th-century BC historian Zuo Qiuming.
In ancient India, literature originated from stories that were originally orally transmitted.
Early genres included drama, fables, sutras and epic poetry.
Sanskrit literature begins with the Vedas, dating back to 1500–1000 BC, and continues with the Sanskrit Epics of Iron Age India.
The Vedas are among the oldest sacred texts.
The Samhitas (vedic collections) date to roughly 1500–1000 BC, and the "circum-Vedic" texts, as well as the redaction of the Samhitas, date to c.
The period between approximately the 6th to 1st centuries BC saw the composition and redaction of the two most influential Indian epics, the Mahabharata and the Ramayana, with subsequent redaction progressing down to the 4th century AD such as Ramcharitmanas.
The earliest known Greek writings are Mycenaean (c.
These documents contain prosaic records largely concerned with trade (lists, inventories, receipts, etc.
Michael Ventris and John Chadwick, the original decipherers of Linear B, state that literature almost certainly existed in Mycenaean Greece, but it was either not written down or, if it was, it was on parchment or wooden tablets, which did not survive the destruction of the Mycenaean palaces in the twelfth century BC.
Homer's epic poems, the Iliad and the Odyssey, are central works of ancient Greek literature.
It is generally accepted that the poems were composed at some point around the late eighth or early seventh century BC.
Modern scholars consider these accounts legendary.
Most researchers believe that the poems were originally transmitted orally.
From antiquity until the present day, the influence of Homeric epic on Western civilization has been significant, inspiring many of its most famous works of literature, music, art and film.
The Homeric epics were the greatest influence on ancient Greek culture and education; to Plato, Homer was simply the one who "has taught Greece" – ten Hellada pepaideuken.
Hesiod's Works and Days (c.
Classical Greek genres included philosophy, poetry, historiography, comedies and dramas.
Plato (428/427 or 424/423 – 348/347 BC) and Aristotle (384–322 BC) authored philosophical texts that are regarded as the foundation of Western philosophy, Sappho (c.
Although drama was popular in ancient Greece, of the hundreds of tragedies written and performed during the classical age, only a limited number of plays by three authors still exist: Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides.
The plays of Aristophanes (c.
The Hebrew religious text, the Torah, is widely seen as a product of the Persian period (539–333 BC, probably 450–350 BC).
This consensus echoes a traditional Jewish view which gives Ezra, the leader of the Jewish community on its return from Babylon, a pivotal role in its promulgation.
This represents a major source of Christianity's Bible, which has had a major influence on Western literature.
The beginning of Roman literature dates to 240 BC, when a Roman audience saw a Latin version of a Greek play.
Literature in Latin would flourish for the next six centuries, and includes essays, histories, poems, plays, and other writings.
The Qur'an (610 AD–632 AD), the main holy book of Islam, had a significant influence on the Arab language, and marked the beginning of Islamic literature.
Muslims believe it was transcribed in the Arabic dialect of the Quraysh, the tribe of Muhammad.
As Islam spread, the Quran had the effect of unifying and standardizing Arabic.
Theological works in Latin were the dominant form of literature in Europe typically found in libraries during the Middle Ages.
Western Vernacular literature includes the Poetic Edda and the sagas, or heroic epics, of Iceland, the Anglo-Saxon Beowulf, and the German Song of Hildebrandt.
A later form of medieval fiction was the romance, an adventurous and sometimes magical narrative with strong popular appeal.
Controversial, religious, political and instructional literature proliferated during the European Renaissance as a result of the Johannes Gutenberg's invention of the printing press around 1440, while the Medieval romance developed into the novel.
Publishing became possible with the invention of writing but became more practical with the invention of printing.
Prior to printing, distributed works were copied manually, by scribes.
The Chinese inventor Bi Sheng made movable type of earthenware c.
Around 1230, Koreans invented a metal type movable printing.
East metal movable type was spread to Europe between the late 14th century and early 15th century.
This invention made books less expensive to produce and therefore more widely available.
Early printed books, single sheets, and images created before 1501 in Europe are known as incunables or incunabula.
Eventually, printing enabled other forms of publishing besides books.
The history of newspaper publishing began in Germany in 1609, with the publishing of magazines following in 1663.
In late 1820s England, growing political and social awareness, "particularly among the utilitarians and Benthamites, promoted the possibility of including courses in English literary study in the newly formed London University".
This further developed into the idea of the study of literature being "the ideal carrier for the propagation of the humanist cultural myth of a well educated, culturally harmonious nation".
The widespread education of women was not common until the nineteenth century, and because of this, literature until recently was mostly male dominated.
There were few English-language women poets whose names are remembered until the twentieth century.
In the nineteenth century some notable individuals include Emily Brontë, Elizabeth Barrett Browning, and Emily Dickinson (see American poetry).
But while generally women are absent from the European canon of Romantic literature, there is one notable exception, the French novelist and memoirist Amantine Dupin (1804–1876) best known by her pen name George Sand.
One of the more popular writers in Europe in her lifetime, being more renowned than both Victor Hugo and Honoré de Balzac in England in the 1830s and 1840s, Sand is recognised as one of the most notable writers of the European Romantic era.
Jane Austen (1775–1817) is the first major English woman novelist, while Aphra Behn is an early female dramatist.
Nobel Prizes in Literature have been awarded between 1901 and 2020 to 117 individuals: 101 men and 16 women.
Selma Lagerlöf (1858–1940) was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature, which she was awarded in 1909.
Additionally, she was the first woman to be granted a membership in The Swedish Academy in 1914.
Feminist scholars have since the twentieth century sought to expand the literary canon to include more women writers.
A separate genre of children's literature only began to emerge in the eighteenth century, with the development of the concept of childhood.
The earliest of these books were educational books, books on conduct, and simple ABCs—often decorated with animals, plants, and anthropomorphic letters.
A fundamental question of literary theory is "what is literature?
Literary fiction is a term used to describe fiction that explores any facet of the human condition, and may involve social commentary.
It is often regarded as having more artistic merit than genre fiction, especially the most commercially oriented types, but this has been contested in recent years, with the serious study of genre fiction within universities.
The very best in literature is annually recognized by the Nobel Prize in Literature, which is awarded to an author from any country who has, in the words of the will of Swedish industrialist Alfred Nobel, produced "in the field of literature the most outstanding work in an ideal direction" (original Swedish: den som inom litteraturen har producerat det mest framstående verket i en idealisk riktning).
Some researchers suggest that literary fiction can play a role in an individual's psychological development.
Psychologists have also been using literature as a therapeutic tool.
Psychologist Hogan argues for the value of the time and emotion that a person devotes to understanding a character's situation in literature; that it can unite a large community by provoking universal emotions, as well as allowing readers access to different cultures, and new emotional experiences.
One study, for example, suggested that the presence of familiar cultural values in literary texts played an important impact on the performance of minority students.
Psychologist Maslow's ideas help literary critics understand how characters in literature reflect their personal culture and the history.
The theory suggests that literature helps an individual's struggle for self-fulfillment.
Religion has had a major influence on literature, through works like the Vedas, the Torah, the Bible, and the Quran.
The King James Version of the Bible has been called "the most influential version of the most influential book in the world, in what is now its most influential language", "the most important book in English religion and culture", and "arguably the most celebrated book in the English-speaking world," principally because of its literary style and widespread distribution.
Prominent atheist figures such as the late Christopher Hitchens and Richard Dawkins have praised the King James Version as being "a giant step in the maturing of English literature" and "a great work of literature", respectively, with Dawkins adding: "A native speaker of English who has never read a word of the King James Bible is verging on the barbarian".
Societies in which preaching has great importance, and those in which religious structures and authorities have a near-monopoly of reading and writing and/or a censorship role (as, for example, in the European Middle Ages), may impart a religious gloss to much of the literature those societies produce or retain.
The traditions of close study of religious texts has furthered the development of techniques and theories in literary studies.
Poetry has traditionally been distinguished from prose by its greater use of the aesthetic qualities of language, including musical devices such as assonance, alliteration, rhyme, and rhythm, and by being set in lines and verses rather than paragraphs, and more recently its use of other typographical elements.
This distinction is complicated by various hybrid forms such as digital poetry, sound poetry, concrete poetry and prose poem, and more generally by the fact that prose possesses rhythm.
Abram Lipsky refers to it as an "open secret" that "prose is not distinguished from poetry by lack of rhythm".
Prior to the 19th century, poetry was commonly understood to be something set in metrical lines: "any kind of subject consisting of Rhythm or Verses".
Possibly as a result of Aristotle's influence (his Poetics), "poetry" before the 19th century was usually less a technical designation for verse than a normative category of fictive or rhetorical art.
As a form it may pre-date literacy, with the earliest works being composed within and sustained by an oral tradition; hence it constitutes the earliest example of literature.
As noted above, prose generally makes far less use of the aesthetic qualities of language than poetry.
However, developments in modern literature, including free verse and prose poetry have tended to blur the differences, and poet T.
Eliot suggested that while "the distinction between verse and prose is clear, the distinction between poetry and prose is obscure".
There are verse novels, a type of narrative poetry in which a novel-length narrative is told through the medium of poetry rather than prose.
Eugene Onegin (1831) by Alexander Pushkin is the most famous example.
On the historical development of prose, Richard Graff notes that, in the case of ancient Greece, "recent scholarship has emphasized the fact that formal prose was a comparatively late development, an 'invention' properly associated with the classical period".
Latin was a major influence on the development of prose in many European countries.
Especially important was the great Roman orator Cicero.
It was the lingua franca among literate Europeans until quite recent times, and the great works of Descartes (1596 – 1650), Francis Bacon (1561–1626), and Baruch Spinoza (1632–1677) were published in Latin.
Among the last important books written primarily in Latin prose were the works of Swedenborg (d.
A novel is a long fictional narrative, usually written in prose.
In English, the term emerged from the Romance languages in the late 15th century, with the meaning of "news"; it came to indicate something new, without a distinction between fact or fiction.
The romance is a closely related long prose narrative.
Walter Scott defined it as "a fictitious narrative in prose or verse; the interest of which turns upon marvelous and uncommon incidents", whereas in the novel "the events are accommodated to the ordinary train of human events and the modern state of society".
Other European languages do not distinguish between romance and novel: "a novel is le roman, der Roman, il romanzo", indicates the proximity of the forms.
Although there are many historical prototypes, so-called "novels before the novel", the modern novel form emerges late in cultural history—roughly during the eighteenth century.
Initially subject to much criticism, the novel has acquired a dominant position amongst literary forms, both popularly and critically.
The publisher Melville House classifies the novella as "too short to be a novel, too long to be a short story".
Publishers and literary award societies typically consider a novella to be between 17,000 and 40,000 words.
A dilemma in defining the "short story" as a literary form is how to, or whether one should, distinguish it from any short narrative and its contested origin, that include the Bible, and Edgar Allan Poe.
Graphic novels and comic books present stories told in a combination of artwork, dialogue, and text.
Electronic literature is a literary genre consisting of works created exclusively on and for digital devices.
Common literary examples of non-fiction include, the essay; travel literature; biography, autobiography and memoir; journalism; letter; diary; history, philosophy, economics; scientific, nature, and technical writings.
Non-fiction can fall within the broad category of literature as "any collection of written work", but some works fall within the narrower definition "by virtue of the excellence of their writing, their originality and their general aesthetic and artistic merits".
Drama is literature intended for performance.
The form is combined with music and dance in opera and musical theatre (see libretto).
A play is a written dramatic work by a playwright that is intended for performance in a theatre; it comprises chiefly dialogue between characters.
A closet drama, by contrast, is written to be read rather than to be performed; the meaning of which can be realized fully on the page.
Nearly all drama took verse form until comparatively recently.
The earliest form of which there exists substantial knowledge is Greek drama.
In the twentieth century, scripts written for non-stage media have been added to this form, including radio, television and film.
The law and literature movement focuses on the interdisciplinary connection between law and literature.
Copyright is a type of intellectual property that gives its owner the exclusive right to make copies of a creative work, usually for a limited time.
The creative work may be in a literary, artistic, educational, or musical form.
Copyright is intended to protect the original expression of an idea in the form of a creative work, but not the idea itself.
Literary works have been protected by copyright law from unauthorized reproduction since at least 1710.
Literary works are defined by copyright law to mean "any work, other than a dramatic or musical work, which is written, spoken or sung, and accordingly includes (a) a table or compilation (other than a database), (b) a computer program, (c) preparatory design material for a computer program, and (d) a database.
Literary works are all works of literature; that is all works expressed in print or writing (other than dramatic or musical works).
The copyright law of the United States has a long and complicated history, dating back to colonial times.
It was established as federal law with the Copyright Act of 1790.
This act was updated many times, including a major revision in 1976.
The copyright law of the European Union is the copyright law applicable within the European Union.
Copyright law is largely harmonized in the Union, although country to country differences exist.
The body of law was implemented in the EU through a number of directives, which the member states need to enact into their national law.
The main copyright directives are the Copyright Term Directive, the Information Society Directive and the Directive on Copyright in the Digital Single Market.
Copyright in the Union is furthermore dependent on international conventions to which the European Union is a member (such as the TRIPS Agreement and conventions to which all Member States are parties (such as the Berne Convention)).
Japan was a party to the original Berne convention in 1899, so its copyright law is in sync with most international regulations.
The convention protected copyrighted works for 50 years after the author's death (or 50 years after publication for unknown authors and corporations).
However, in 2004 Japan extended the copyright term to 70 years for cinematographic works.
At the end of 2018, as a result of the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations, the 70-year term was applied to all works.
This new term is not applied retroactively; works that had entered the public domain between 1999 and 2018 by expiration would remain in the public domain.
Censorship of literature is employed by states, religious organizations, educational institutions, etc.
Generally such bodies attempt to ban works for political reasons, or because they deal with other controversial matters such as race, or sex.
A notable example of censorship is James Joyce's novel Ulysses, which has been described by Russian-American novelist Vladimir Nabokov as a "divine work of art" and the greatest masterpiece of 20th century prose.
It was banned in the United States from 1921 until 1933 on the grounds of obscenity.
Nowadays it is a central literary text in English literature courses, throughout the world.
There are numerous awards recognizing achievements and contributions in literature.
Given the diversity of the field, awards are typically limited in scope, usually on: form, genre, language, nationality and output (e.
The Nobel Prize in Literature was one of the six Nobel Prizes established by the will of Alfred Nobel in 1895, and is awarded to an author on the basis of their body of work, rather than to, or for, a particular work itself.
Other literary prizes for which all nationalities are eligible include: the Neustadt International Prize for Literature, the Man Booker International Prize, Pulitzer Prize, Hugo Award, Guardian First Book Award and the Franz Kafka Prize.
Language is a structured system of communication that consists of grammar and vocabulary.
It is the primary means by which humans convey meaning, both in spoken and signed forms, and may also be conveyed through writing.
Human language is characterized by its cultural and historical diversity, with significant variations observed between cultures and across time.
Human languages possess the properties of productivity and displacement, which enable the creation of an infinite number of sentences, and the ability to refer to objects, events, and ideas that are not immediately present in the discourse.
The use of human language relies on social convention and is acquired through learning.
Estimates of the number of human languages in the world vary between 5,000 and 7,000.
Precise estimates depend on an arbitrary distinction (dichotomy) established between languages and dialects.
Natural languages are spoken, signed, or both; however, any language can be encoded into secondary media using auditory, visual, or tactile stimuli – for example, writing, whistling, signing, or braille.
In other words, human language is modality-independent, but written or signed language is the way to inscribe or encode the natural human speech or gestures.
Depending on philosophical perspectives regarding the definition of language and meaning, when used as a general concept, "language" may refer to the cognitive ability to learn and use systems of complex communication, or to describe the set of rules that makes up these systems, or the set of utterances that can be produced from those rules.
All languages rely on the process of semiosis to relate signs to particular meanings.
Oral, manual and tactile languages contain a phonological system that governs how symbols are used to form sequences known as words or morphemes, and a syntactic system that governs how words and morphemes are combined to form phrases and utterances.
The scientific study of language is called linguistics.
Critical examinations of languages, such as philosophy of language, the relationships between language and thought, how words represent experience, etc.
Thinkers such as Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–1778) have argued that language originated from emotions, while others like Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) have argued that languages originated from rational and logical thought.
Twentieth century philosophers such as Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951) argued that philosophy is really the study of language itself.
Major figures in contemporary linguistics include Ferdinand de Saussure and Noam Chomsky.
Language is thought to have gradually diverged from earlier primate communication systems when early hominins acquired the ability to form a theory of mind and shared intentionality.
This development is sometimes thought to have coincided with an increase in brain volume, and many linguists see the structures of language as having evolved to serve specific communicative and social functions.
Language is processed in many different locations in the human brain, but especially in Broca's and Wernicke's areas.
Humans acquire language through social interaction in early childhood, and children generally speak fluently by approximately three years old.
Language and culture are codependent.
Therefore, in addition to its strictly communicative uses, language has social uses such as signifying group identity, social stratification, as well as use for social grooming and entertainment.
Languages evolve and diversify over time, and the history of their evolution can be reconstructed by comparing modern languages to determine which traits their ancestral languages must have had in order for the later developmental stages to occur.
A group of languages that descend from a common ancestor is known as a language family; in contrast, a language that has been demonstrated not to have any living or non-living relationship with another language is called a language isolate.
There are also many unclassified languages whose relationships have not been established, and spurious languages may have not existed at all.
Academic consensus holds that between 50% and 90% of languages spoken at the beginning of the 21st century will probably have become extinct by the year 2100.
The English word language derives ultimately from Proto-Indo-European *dn̥ǵʰwéh₂s "tongue, speech, language" through Latin lingua, "language; tongue", and Old French language.
The word is sometimes used to refer to codes, ciphers, and other kinds of artificially constructed communication systems such as formally defined computer languages used for computer programming.
Unlike conventional human languages, a formal language in this sense is a system of signs for encoding and decoding information.
This article specifically concerns the properties of natural human language as it is studied in the discipline of linguistics.
As an object of linguistic study, "language" has two primary meanings: an abstract concept, and a specific linguistic system, e.
The Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure, who defined the modern discipline of linguistics, first explicitly formulated the distinction using the French word langage for language as a concept, langue as a specific instance of a language system, and parole for the concrete use of speech in a particular language.
When speaking of language as a general concept, definitions can be used which stress different aspects of the phenomenon.
These definitions also entail different approaches and understandings of language, and they also inform different and often incompatible schools of linguistic theory.
Debates about the nature and origin of language go back to the ancient world.
Greek philosophers such as Gorgias and Plato debated the relation between words, concepts and reality.
Gorgias argued that language could represent neither the objective experience nor human experience, and that communication and truth were therefore impossible.
Plato maintained that communication is possible because language represents ideas and concepts that exist independently of, and prior to, language.
During the Enlightenment and its debates about human origins, it became fashionable to speculate about the origin of language.
Thinkers such as Rousseau and Johann Gottfried Herder argued that language had originated in the instinctive expression of emotions, and that it was originally closer to music and poetry than to the logical expression of rational thought.
Rationalist philosophers such as Kant and René Descartes held the opposite view.
Around the turn of the 20th century, thinkers began to wonder about the role of language in shaping our experiences of the world – asking whether language simply reflects the objective structure of the world, or whether it creates concepts that in turn impose structure on our experience of the objective world.
This led to the question of whether philosophical problems are really firstly linguistic problems.
The resurgence of the view that language plays a significant role in the creation and circulation of concepts, and that the study of philosophy is essentially the study of language, is associated with what has been called the linguistic turn and philosophers such as Wittgenstein in 20th-century philosophy.
These debates about language in relation to meaning and reference, cognition and consciousness remain active today.
One definition sees language primarily as the mental faculty that allows humans to undertake linguistic behaviour: to learn languages and to produce and understand utterances.
This definition stresses the universality of language to all humans, and it emphasizes the biological basis for the human capacity for language as a unique development of the human brain.
Proponents of the view that the drive to language acquisition is innate in humans argue that this is supported by the fact that all cognitively normal children raised in an environment where language is accessible will acquire language without formal instruction.
Languages may even develop spontaneously in environments where people live or grow up together without a common language; for example, creole languages and spontaneously developed sign languages such as Nicaraguan Sign Language.
This view, which can be traced back to the philosophers Kant and Descartes, understands language to be largely innate, for example, in Chomsky's theory of universal grammar, or American philosopher Jerry Fodor's extreme innatist theory.
These kinds of definitions are often applied in studies of language within a cognitive science framework and in neurolinguistics.
Another definition sees language as a formal system of signs governed by grammatical rules of combination to communicate meaning.
This definition stresses that human languages can be described as closed structural systems consisting of rules that relate particular signs to particular meanings.
This structuralist view of language was first introduced by Ferdinand de Saussure, and his structuralism remains foundational for many approaches to language.
Some proponents of Saussure's view of language have advocated a formal approach that studies language structure by identifying its basic elements and then by presenting a formal account of the rules according to which the elements combine in order to form words and sentences.
The main proponent of such a theory is Noam Chomsky, the originator of the generative theory of grammar, who has defined language as the construction of sentences that can be generated using transformational grammars.
Chomsky considers these rules to be an innate feature of the human mind and to constitute the rudiments of what language is.
By way of contrast, such transformational grammars are also commonly used in formal logic, in formal linguistics, and in applied computational linguistics.
In the philosophy of language, the view of linguistic meaning as residing in the logical relations between propositions and reality was developed by philosophers such as Alfred Tarski, Bertrand Russell, and other formal logicians.
Yet another definition sees language as a system of communication that enables humans to exchange verbal or symbolic utterances.
This definition stresses the social functions of language and the fact that humans use it to express themselves and to manipulate objects in their environment.
Functional theories of grammar explain grammatical structures by their communicative functions, and understand the grammatical structures of language to be the result of an adaptive process by which grammar was "tailored" to serve the communicative needs of its users.
This view of language is associated with the study of language in pragmatic, cognitive, and interactive frameworks, as well as in sociolinguistics and linguistic anthropology.
Functionalist theories tend to study grammar as dynamic phenomena, as structures that are always in the process of changing as they are employed by their speakers.
This view places importance on the study of linguistic typology, or the classification of languages according to structural features, as processes of grammaticalization tend to follow trajectories that are partly dependent on typology.
In the philosophy of language, the view of pragmatics as being central to language and meaning is often associated with Wittgenstein's later works and with ordinary language philosophers such as J.
Austin, Paul Grice, John Searle, and W.
A number of features, many of which were described by Charles Hockett and called design features set human language apart from communication used by non-human animals.
Communication systems used by other animals such as bees or apes are closed systems that consist of a finite, usually very limited, number of possible ideas that can be expressed.
In contrast, human language is open-ended and productive, meaning that it allows humans to produce a vast range of utterances from a finite set of elements, and to create new words and sentences.
This is possible because human language is based on a dual code, in which a finite number of elements which are meaningless in themselves (e.
However, one study has demonstrated that an Australian bird, the chestnut-crowned babbler, is capable of using the same acoustic elements in different arrangements to create two functionally distinct vocalizations.
Additionally, pied babblers have demonstrated the ability to generate two functionally distinct vocalisations composed of the same sound type, which can only be distinguished by the number of repeated elements.
Several species of animals have proved to be able to acquire forms of communication through social learning: for instance a bonobo named Kanzi learned to express itself using a set of symbolic lexigrams.
Similarly, many species of birds and whales learn their songs by imitating other members of their species.
However, while some animals may acquire large numbers of words and symbols, none have been able to learn as many different signs as are generally known by an average 4 year old human, nor have any acquired anything resembling the complex grammar of human language.
Human languages differ from animal communication systems in that they employ grammatical and semantic categories, such as noun and verb, present and past, which may be used to express exceedingly complex meanings.
It is distinguished by the property of recursivity: for example, a noun phrase can contain another noun phrase (as in "[[the chimpanzee]'s lips]") or a clause can contain another clause (as in "[I see [the dog is running]]").
Human language is the only known natural communication system whose adaptability may be referred to as modality independent.
This means that it can be used not only for communication through one channel or medium, but through several.
For example, spoken language uses the auditive modality, whereas sign languages and writing use the visual modality, and braille writing uses the tactile modality.
Human language is unusual in being able to refer to abstract concepts and to imagined or hypothetical events as well as events that took place in the past or may happen in the future.
This ability to refer to events that are not at the same time or place as the speech event is called displacement, and while some animal communication systems can use displacement (such as the communication of bees that can communicate the location of sources of nectar that are out of sight), the degree to which it is used in human language is also considered unique.
Theories about the origin of language differ in regard to their basic assumptions about what language is.
Some theories are based on the idea that language is so complex that one cannot imagine it simply appearing from nothing in its final form, but that it must have evolved from earlier pre-linguistic systems among our pre-human ancestors.
These theories can be called continuity-based theories.
The opposite viewpoint is that language is such a unique human trait that it cannot be compared to anything found among non-humans and that it must therefore have appeared suddenly in the transition from pre-hominids to early man.
These theories can be defined as discontinuity-based.
Similarly, theories based on the generative view of language pioneered by Noam Chomsky see language mostly as an innate faculty that is largely genetically encoded, whereas functionalist theories see it as a system that is largely cultural, learned through social interaction.
Continuity-based theories are held by a majority of scholars, but they vary in how they envision this development.
Those who see language as being mostly innate, such as psychologist Steven Pinker, hold the precedents to be animal cognition, whereas those who see language as a socially learned tool of communication, such as psychologist Michael Tomasello, see it as having developed from animal communication in primates: either gestural or vocal communication to assist in cooperation.
Other continuity-based models see language as having developed from music, a view already espoused by Rousseau, Herder, Humboldt, and Charles Darwin.
A prominent proponent of this view is archaeologist Steven Mithen.
Stephen Anderson states that the age of spoken languages is estimated at 60,000 to 100,000 years and that: Researchers on the evolutionary origin of language generally find it plausible to suggest that language was invented only once, and that all modern spoken languages are thus in some way related, even if that relation can no longer be recovered .
Because language emerged in the early prehistory of man, before the existence of any written records, its early development has left no historical traces, and it is believed that no comparable processes can be observed today.
Theories that stress continuity often look at animals to see if, for example, primates display any traits that can be seen as analogous to what pre-human language must have been like.
Early human fossils can be inspected for traces of physical adaptation to language use or pre-linguistic forms of symbolic behaviour.
Among the signs in human fossils that may suggest linguistic abilities are: the size of the brain relative to body mass, the presence of a larynx capable of advanced sound production and the nature of tools and other manufactured artifacts.
It was mostly undisputed that pre-human australopithecines did not have communication systems significantly different from those found in great apes in general.
However, a 2017 study on Ardipithecus ramidus challenges this belief.
Scholarly opinions vary as to the developments since the appearance of the genus Homo some 2.
Some scholars assume the development of primitive language-like systems (proto-language) as early as Homo habilis (2.
Chomsky is one prominent proponent of a discontinuity-based theory of human language origins.
He suggests that for scholars interested in the nature of language, "talk about the evolution of the language capacity is beside the point.
In March 2024, researchers reported that the beginnings of human language began about 1.
The study of language, linguistics, has been developing into a science since the first grammatical descriptions of particular languages in India more than 2000 years ago, after the development of the Brahmi script.
Modern linguistics is a science that concerns itself with all aspects of language, examining it from all of the theoretical viewpoints described above.
The academic study of language is conducted within many different disciplinary areas and from different theoretical angles, all of which inform modern approaches to linguistics.
For example, descriptive linguistics examines the grammar of single languages, theoretical linguistics develops theories on how best to conceptualize and define the nature of language based on data from the various extant human languages, sociolinguistics studies how languages are used for social purposes informing in turn the study of the social functions of language and grammatical description, neurolinguistics studies how language is processed in the human brain and allows the experimental testing of theories, computational linguistics builds on theoretical and descriptive linguistics to construct computational models of language often aimed at processing natural language or at testing linguistic hypotheses, and historical linguistics relies on grammatical and lexical descriptions of languages to trace their individual histories and reconstruct trees of language families by using the comparative method.
The formal study of language is often considered to have started in India with Pāṇini, the 5th century BC grammarian who formulated 3,959 rules of Sanskrit morphology.
However, Sumerian scribes already studied the differences between Sumerian and Akkadian grammar around 1900 BC.
Subsequent grammatical traditions developed in all of the ancient cultures that adopted writing.
In the 17th century AD, the French Port-Royal Grammarians developed the idea that the grammars of all languages were a reflection of the universal basics of thought, and therefore that grammar was universal.
In the 18th century, the first use of the comparative method by British philologist and expert on ancient India William Jones sparked the rise of comparative linguistics.
The scientific study of language was broadened from Indo-European to language in general by Wilhelm von Humboldt.
Early in the 20th century, Ferdinand de Saussure introduced the idea of language as a static system of interconnected units, defined through the oppositions between them.
By introducing a distinction between diachronic and synchronic analyses of language, he laid the foundation of the modern discipline of linguistics.
Saussure also introduced several basic dimensions of linguistic analysis that are still fundamental in many contemporary linguistic theories, such as the distinctions between syntagm and paradigm, and the Langue-parole distinction, distinguishing language as an abstract system (langue), from language as a concrete manifestation of this system (parole).
In the 1960s, Noam Chomsky formulated the generative theory of language.
According to this theory, the most basic form of language is a set of syntactic rules that is universal for all humans and which underlies the grammars of all human languages.
This set of rules is called Universal Grammar; for Chomsky, describing it is the primary objective of the discipline of linguistics.
Thus, he considered that the grammars of individual languages are only of importance to linguistics insofar as they allow us to deduce the universal underlying rules from which the observable linguistic variability is generated.
In opposition to the formal theories of the generative school, functional theories of language propose that since language is fundamentally a tool, its structures are best analyzed and understood by reference to their functions.
Formal theories of grammar seek to define the different elements of language and describe the way they relate to each other as systems of formal rules or operations, while functional theories seek to define the functions performed by language and then relate them to the linguistic elements that carry them out.
The framework of cognitive linguistics interprets language in terms of the concepts (which are sometimes universal, and sometimes specific to a particular language) which underlie its forms.
Cognitive linguistics is primarily concerned with how the mind creates meaning through language.
Speaking is the default modality for language in all cultures with hearing members.
The production of spoken language depends on sophisticated capacities for controlling the lips, tongue and other components of the vocal apparatus, the ability to acoustically decode speech sounds, and the neurological apparatus required for acquiring and producing language.
The study of the genetic bases for human language is at an early stage: the only gene that has definitely been implicated in language production is FOXP2, which may cause a kind of congenital language disorder if affected by mutations.
The brain is the coordinating center of all linguistic activity; it controls both the production of linguistic cognition and of meaning and the mechanics of speech production.
Nonetheless, our knowledge of the neurological bases for language is quite limited, though it has advanced considerably with the use of modern imaging techniques.
The discipline of linguistics dedicated to studying the neurological aspects of language is called neurolinguistics.
Early work in neurolinguistics involved the study of language in people with brain lesions, to see how lesions in specific areas affect language and speech.
In this way, neuroscientists in the 19th century discovered that two areas in the brain are crucially implicated in language processing.
The first area is Wernicke's area, which is in the posterior section of the superior temporal gyrus in the dominant cerebral hemisphere.
People with a lesion in this area of the brain develop receptive aphasia, a condition in which there is a major impairment of language comprehension, while speech retains a natural-sounding rhythm and a relatively normal sentence structure.
The second area is Broca's area, in the posterior inferior frontal gyrus of the dominant hemisphere.
People with a lesion to this area develop expressive aphasia, meaning that they know what they want to say, they just cannot get it out.
They are typically able to understand what is being said to them, but unable to speak fluently.
Other symptoms that may be present in expressive aphasia include problems with word repetition.
The condition affects both spoken and written language.
Those with this aphasia also exhibit ungrammatical speech and show inability to use syntactic information to determine the meaning of sentences.
Both expressive and receptive aphasia also affect the use of sign language, in analogous ways to how they affect speech, with expressive aphasia causing signers to sign slowly and with incorrect grammar, whereas a signer with receptive aphasia will sign fluently, but make little sense to others and have difficulties comprehending others' signs.
This shows that the impairment is specific to the ability to use language, not to the physiology used for speech production.
With technological advances in the late 20th century, neurolinguists have also incorporated non-invasive techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electrophysiology to study language processing in individuals without impairments.
Spoken language relies on human physical ability to produce sound, which is a longitudinal wave propagated through the air at a frequency capable of vibrating the ear drum.
This ability depends on the physiology of the human speech organs.
These organs consist of the lungs, the voice box (larynx), and the upper vocal tract – the throat, the mouth, and the nose.
By controlling the different parts of the speech apparatus, the airstream can be manipulated to produce different speech sounds.
The sound of speech can be analyzed into a combination of segmental and suprasegmental elements.
The segmental elements are those that follow each other in sequences, which are usually represented by distinct letters in alphabetic scripts, such as the Roman script.
In free flowing speech, there are no clear boundaries between one segment and the next, nor usually are there any audible pauses between them.
Segments therefore are distinguished by their distinct sounds which are a result of their different articulations, and can be either vowels or consonants.
Suprasegmental phenomena encompass such elements as stress, phonation type, voice timbre, and prosody or intonation, all of which may have effects across multiple segments.
Consonants and vowel segments combine to form syllables, which in turn combine to form utterances; these can be distinguished phonetically as the space between two inhalations.
Acoustically, these different segments are characterized by different formant structures, that are visible in a spectrogram of the recorded sound wave.
Formants are the amplitude peaks in the frequency spectrum of a specific sound.
Vowels are those sounds that have no audible friction caused by the narrowing or obstruction of some part of the upper vocal tract.
They vary in quality according to the degree of lip aperture and the placement of the tongue within the oral cavity.
Vowels are called close when the lips are relatively closed, as in the pronunciation of the vowel [i] (English "ee"), or open when the lips are relatively open, as in the vowel [a] (English "ah").
If the tongue is located towards the back of the mouth, the quality changes, creating vowels such as [u] (English "oo").
The quality also changes depending on whether the lips are rounded as opposed to unrounded, creating distinctions such as that between [i] (unrounded front vowel such as English "ee") and [y] (rounded front vowel such as German "ü").
Consonants are those sounds that have audible friction or closure at some point within the upper vocal tract.
Consonant sounds vary by place of articulation, i.
Each place of articulation produces a different set of consonant sounds, which are further distinguished by manner of articulation, or the kind of friction, whether full closure, in which case the consonant is called occlusive or stop, or different degrees of aperture creating fricatives and approximants.
Consonants can also be either voiced or unvoiced, depending on whether the vocal cords are set in vibration by airflow during the production of the sound.
Voicing is what separates English [s] in bus (unvoiced sibilant) from [z] in buzz (voiced sibilant).
Some speech sounds, both vowels and consonants, involve release of air flow through the nasal cavity, and these are called nasals or nasalized sounds.
Other sounds are defined by the way the tongue moves within the mouth such as the l-sounds (called laterals, because the air flows along both sides of the tongue), and the r-sounds (called rhotics).
By using these speech organs, humans can produce hundreds of distinct sounds: some appear very often in the world's languages, whereas others are much more common in certain language families, language areas, or even specific to a single language.
Human languages display considerable plasticity in their deployment of two fundamental modes: oral (speech and mouthing) and manual (sign and gesture).
For example, it is common for oral language to be accompanied by gesture, and for sign language to be accompanied by mouthing.
In addition, some language communities use both modes to convey lexical or grammatical meaning, each mode complementing the other.
Such bimodal use of language is especially common in genres such as story-telling (with Plains Indian Sign Language and Australian Aboriginal sign languages used alongside oral language, for example), but also occurs in mundane conversation.
For instance, many Australian languages have a rich set of case suffixes that provide details about the instrument used to perform an action.
Others lack such grammatical precision in the oral mode, but supplement it with gesture to convey that information in the sign mode.
In Iwaidja, for example, 'he went out for fish using a torch' is spoken as simply "he-hunted fish torch", but the word for 'torch' is accompanied by a gesture indicating that it was held.
In another example, the ritual language Damin had a heavily reduced oral vocabulary of only a few hundred words, each of which was very general in meaning, but which were supplemented by gesture for greater precision (e.
Secondary modes of language, by which a fundamental mode is conveyed in a different medium, include writing (including braille), sign (in manually coded language), whistling and drumming.
Tertiary modes – such as semaphore, Morse code and spelling alphabets – convey the secondary mode of writing in a different medium.
For some extinct languages that are maintained for ritual or liturgical purposes, writing may be the primary mode, with speech secondary.
When described as a system of symbolic communication, language is traditionally seen as consisting of three parts: signs, meanings, and a code connecting signs with their meanings.
The study of the process of semiosis, how signs and meanings are combined, used, and interpreted is called semiotics.
Signs can be composed of sounds, gestures, letters, or symbols, depending on whether the language is spoken, signed, or written, and they can be combined into complex signs, such as words and phrases.
When used in communication, a sign is encoded and transmitted by a sender through a channel to a receiver who decodes it.
Some of the properties that define human language as opposed to other communication systems are: the arbitrariness of the linguistic sign, meaning that there is no predictable connection between a linguistic sign and its meaning; the duality of the linguistic system, meaning that linguistic structures are built by combining elements into larger structures that can be seen as layered, e.
The rules by which signs can be combined to form words and phrases are called syntax or grammar.
The meaning that is connected to individual signs, morphemes, words, phrases, and texts is called semantics.
The division of language into separate but connected systems of sign and meaning goes back to the first linguistic studies of de Saussure and is now used in almost all branches of linguistics.
Languages express meaning by relating a sign form to a meaning, or its content.
Sign forms must be something that can be perceived, for example, in sounds, images, or gestures, and then related to a specific meaning by social convention.
Because the basic relation of meaning for most linguistic signs is based on social convention, linguistic signs can be considered arbitrary, in the sense that the convention is established socially and historically, rather than by means of a natural relation between a specific sign form and its meaning.
Thus, languages must have a vocabulary of signs related to specific meaning.
The English sign "dog" denotes, for example, a member of the species Canis familiaris.
In a language, the array of arbitrary signs connected to specific meanings is called the lexicon, and a single sign connected to a meaning is called a lexeme.
Not all meanings in a language are represented by single words.
Often, semantic concepts are embedded in the morphology or syntax of the language in the form of grammatical categories.
All languages contain the semantic structure of predication: a structure that predicates a property, state, or action.
Traditionally, semantics has been understood to be the study of how speakers and interpreters assign truth values to statements, so that meaning is understood to be the process by which a predicate can be said to be true or false about an entity, e.
Recently, this model of semantics has been complemented with more dynamic models of meaning that incorporate shared knowledge about the context in which a sign is interpreted into the production of meaning.
Such models of meaning are explored in the field of pragmatics.
Depending on modality, language structure can be based on systems of sounds (speech), gestures (sign languages), or graphic or tactile symbols (writing).
The ways in which languages use sounds or signs to construct meaning are studied in phonology.
Sounds as part of a linguistic system are called phonemes.
Phonemes are abstract units of sound, defined as the smallest units in a language that can serve to distinguish between the meaning of a pair of minimally different words, a so-called minimal pair.
In English, for example, the words bat [bæt] and pat [pʰæt] form a minimal pair, in which the distinction between /b/ and /p/ differentiates the two words, which have different meanings.
However, each language contrasts sounds in different ways.
For example, in a language that does not distinguish between voiced and unvoiced consonants, the sounds [p] and [b] (if they both occur) could be considered a single phoneme, and consequently, the two pronunciations would have the same meaning.
Similarly, the English language does not distinguish phonemically between aspirated and non-aspirated pronunciations of consonants, as many other languages like Korean and Hindi do: the unaspirated /p/ in spin [spɪn] and the aspirated /p/ in pin [pʰɪn] are considered to be merely different ways of pronouncing the same phoneme (such variants of a single phoneme are called allophones), whereas in Mandarin Chinese, the same difference in pronunciation distinguishes between the words [pʰá] 'crouch' and [pā] 'eight' (the accent above the á means that the vowel is pronounced with a high tone and the accent above the ā means that the vowel is pronounced with a flat tone).
All spoken languages have phonemes of at least two different categories, vowels and consonants, that can be combined to form syllables.
As well as segments such as consonants and vowels, some languages also use sound in other ways to convey meaning.
Many languages, for example, use stress, pitch, duration, and tone to distinguish meaning.
Because these phenomena operate outside of the level of single segments, they are called suprasegmental.
Some languages have only a few phonemes, for example, Rotokas and Pirahã language with 11 and 10 phonemes respectively, whereas languages like Taa may have as many as 141 phonemes.
In sign languages, the equivalent to phonemes (formerly called cheremes) are defined by the basic elements of gestures, such as hand shape, orientation, location, and motion, which correspond to manners of articulation in spoken language.
Writing systems represent language using visual symbols, which may or may not correspond to the sounds of spoken language.
The Latin alphabet (and those on which it is based or that have been derived from it) was originally based on the representation of single sounds, so that words were constructed from letters that generally denote a single consonant or vowel in the structure of the word.
In syllabic scripts, such as the Inuktitut syllabary, each sign represents a whole syllable.
In logographic scripts, each sign represents an entire word, and will generally bear no relation to the sound of that word in spoken language.
Because all languages have a very large number of words, no purely logographic scripts are known to exist.
Written language represents the way spoken sounds and words follow one after another by arranging symbols according to a pattern that follows a certain direction.
The direction used in a writing system is entirely arbitrary and established by convention.
Some writing systems use the horizontal axis (left to right as the Latin script or right to left as the Arabic script), while others such as traditional Chinese writing use the vertical dimension (from top to bottom).
A few writing systems use opposite directions for alternating lines, and others, such as the ancient Maya script, can be written in either direction and rely on graphic cues to show the reader the direction of reading.
In order to represent the sounds of the world's languages in writing, linguists have developed the International Phonetic Alphabet, designed to represent all of the discrete sounds that are known to contribute to meaning in human languages.
Grammar is the study of how meaningful elements called morphemes within a language can be combined into utterances.
Morphemes can either be free or bound.
If they are free to be moved around within an utterance, they are usually called words, and if they are bound to other words or morphemes, they are called affixes.
The way in which meaningful elements can be combined within a language is governed by rules.
The study of the rules for the internal structure of words are called morphology.
The rules of the internal structure of phrases and sentences are called syntax.
Grammar can be described as a system of categories and a set of rules that determine how categories combine to form different aspects of meaning.
Languages differ widely in whether they are encoded through the use of categories or lexical units.
However, several categories are so common as to be nearly universal.
Such universal categories include the encoding of the grammatical relations of participants and predicates by grammatically distinguishing between their relations to a predicate, the encoding of temporal and spatial relations on predicates, and a system of grammatical person governing reference to and distinction between speakers and addressees and those about whom they are speaking.
Languages organize their parts of speech into classes according to their functions and positions relative to other parts.
All languages, for instance, make a basic distinction between a group of words that prototypically denotes things and concepts and a group of words that prototypically denotes actions and events.
The first group, which includes English words such as "dog" and "song", are usually called nouns.
The second, which includes "think" and "sing", are called verbs.
Another common category is the adjective: words that describe properties or qualities of nouns, such as "red" or "big".
Word classes can be "open" if new words can continuously be added to the class, or relatively "closed" if there is a fixed number of words in a class.
In English, the class of pronouns is closed, whereas the class of adjectives is open, since an infinite number of adjectives can be constructed from verbs (e.
In other languages such as Korean, the situation is the opposite, and new pronouns can be constructed, whereas the number of adjectives is fixed.
Word classes also carry out differing functions in grammar.
Prototypically, verbs are used to construct predicates, while nouns are used as arguments of predicates.
In a sentence such as "Sally runs", the predicate is "runs", because it is the word that predicates a specific state about its argument "Sally".
Some verbs such as "curse" can take two arguments, e.
A predicate that can only take a single argument is called intransitive, while a predicate that can take two arguments is called transitive.
Many other word classes exist in different languages, such as conjunctions like "and" that serve to join two sentences, articles that introduce a noun, interjections such as "wow!
Some languages have positionals that describe the spatial position of an event or entity.
Many languages have classifiers that identify countable nouns as belonging to a particular type or having a particular shape.
In linguistics, the study of the internal structure of complex words and the processes by which words are formed is called morphology.
In most languages, it is possible to construct complex words that are built of several morphemes.
For instance, the English word "unexpected" can be analyzed as being composed of the three morphemes "un-", "expect" and "-ed".
Morphemes can be classified according to whether they are independent morphemes, so-called roots, or whether they can only co-occur attached to other morphemes.
These bound morphemes or affixes can be classified according to their position in relation to the root: prefixes precede the root, suffixes follow the root, and infixes are inserted in the middle of a root.
Affixes serve to modify or elaborate the meaning of the root.
Some languages change the meaning of words by changing the phonological structure of a word, for example, the English word "run", which in the past tense is "ran".
This process is called ablaut.
Furthermore, morphology distinguishes between the process of inflection, which modifies or elaborates on a word, and the process of derivation, which creates a new word from an existing one.
In English, the verb "sing" has the inflectional forms "singing" and "sung", which are both verbs, and the derivational form "singer", which is a noun derived from the verb with the agentive suffix "-er".
Languages differ widely in how much they rely on morphological processes of word formation.
In some languages, for example, Chinese, there are no morphological processes, and all grammatical information is encoded syntactically by forming strings of single words.
This type of morpho-syntax is often called isolating, or analytic, because there is almost a full correspondence between a single word and a single aspect of meaning.
Most languages have words consisting of several morphemes, but they vary in the degree to which morphemes are discrete units.
In many languages, notably in most Indo-European languages, single morphemes may have several distinct meanings that cannot be analyzed into smaller segments.
For example, in Latin, the word bonus, or "good", consists of the root bon-, meaning "good", and the suffix -us, which indicates masculine gender, singular number, and nominative case.
These languages are called fusional languages, because several meanings may be fused into a single morpheme.
The opposite of fusional languages are agglutinative languages which construct words by stringing morphemes together in chains, but with each morpheme as a discrete semantic unit.
An example of such a language is Turkish, where for example, the word evlerinizden, or "from your houses", consists of the morphemes, ev-ler-iniz-den with the meanings house-plural-your-from.
The languages that rely on morphology to the greatest extent are traditionally called polysynthetic languages.
They may express the equivalent of an entire English sentence in a single word.
For example, in Persian the single word نفهمیدمش, nafahmidamesh means I didn't understand it consisting of morphemes na-fahm-id-am-esh with the meanings, "negation.
As another example with more complexity, in the Yupik word tuntussuqatarniksatengqiggtuq, which means "He had not yet said again that he was going to hunt reindeer", the word consists of the morphemes tuntu-ssur-qatar-ni-ksaite-ngqiggte-uq with the meanings, "reindeer-hunt-future-say-negation-again-third.
Many languages use morphology to cross-reference words within a sentence.
This is sometimes called agreement.
For example, in many Indo-European languages, adjectives must cross-reference the noun they modify in terms of number, case, and gender, so that the Latin adjective bonus, or "good", is inflected to agree with a noun that is masculine gender, singular number, and nominative case.
In many polysynthetic languages, verbs cross-reference their subjects and objects.
In these types of languages, a single verb may include information that would require an entire sentence in English.
For example, in the Basque phrase ikusi nauzu, or "you saw me", the past tense auxiliary verb n-au-zu (similar to English "do") agrees with both the subject (you) expressed by the n- prefix, and with the object (me) expressed by the – zu suffix.
Another way in which languages convey meaning is through the order of words within a sentence.
The grammatical rules for how to produce new sentences from words that are already known is called syntax.
The syntactical rules of a language determine why a sentence in English such as "I love you" is meaningful, but "*love you I" is not.
Syntactical rules determine how word order and sentence structure is constrained, and how those constraints contribute to meaning.
For example, in English, the two sentences "the slaves were cursing the master" and "the master was cursing the slaves" mean different things, because the role of the grammatical subject is encoded by the noun being in front of the verb, and the role of object is encoded by the noun appearing after the verb.
Conversely, in Latin, both Dominus servos vituperabat and Servos vituperabat dominus mean "the master was reprimanding the slaves", because servos, or "slaves", is in the accusative case, showing that they are the grammatical object of the sentence, and dominus, or "master", is in the nominative case, showing that he is the subject.
Latin uses morphology to express the distinction between subject and object, whereas English uses word order.
Another example of how syntactic rules contribute to meaning is the rule of inverse word order in questions, which exists in many languages.
This rule explains why when in English, the phrase "John is talking to Lucy" is turned into a question, it becomes "Who is John talking to?
The latter example may be used as a way of placing special emphasis on "who", thereby slightly altering the meaning of the question.
Syntax also includes the rules for how complex sentences are structured by grouping words together in units, called phrases, that can occupy different places in a larger syntactic structure.
Sentences can be described as consisting of phrases connected in a tree structure, connecting the phrases to each other at different levels.
To the right is a graphic representation of the syntactic analysis of the English sentence "the cat sat on the mat".
The sentence is analyzed as being constituted by a noun phrase, a verb, and a prepositional phrase; the prepositional phrase is further divided into a preposition and a noun phrase, and the noun phrases consist of an article and a noun.
The reason sentences can be seen as being composed of phrases is because each phrase would be moved around as a single element if syntactic operations were carried out.
For example, "the cat" is one phrase, and "on the mat" is another, because they would be treated as single units if a decision was made to emphasize the location by moving forward the prepositional phrase: "[And] on the mat, the cat sat".
There are many different formalist and functionalist frameworks that propose theories for describing syntactic structures, based on different assumptions about what language is and how it should be described.
Each of them would analyze a sentence such as this in a different manner.
Languages can be classified in relation to their grammatical types.
Languages that belong to different families nonetheless often have features in common, and these shared features tend to correlate.
For example, languages can be classified on the basis of their basic word order, the relative order of the verb, and its constituents in a normal indicative sentence.
In English, the basic order is SVO (subject–verb–object): "The snake(S) bit(V) the man(O)", whereas for example, the corresponding sentence in the Australian language Gamilaraay would be d̪uyugu n̪ama d̪ayn yiːy (snake man bit), SOV.
Word order type is relevant as a typological parameter, because basic word order type corresponds with other syntactic parameters, such as the relative order of nouns and adjectives, or of the use of prepositions or postpositions.
Such correlations are called implicational universals.
For example, most (but not all) languages that are of the SOV type have postpositions rather than prepositions, and have adjectives before nouns.
All languages structure sentences into Subject, Verb, and Object, but languages differ in the way they classify the relations between actors and actions.
English uses the nominative-accusative word typology: in English transitive clauses, the subjects of both intransitive sentences ("I run") and transitive sentences ("I love you") are treated in the same way, shown here by the nominative pronoun I.
Some languages, called ergative, Gamilaraay among them, distinguish instead between Agents and Patients.
In ergative languages, the single participant in an intransitive sentence, such as "I run", is treated the same as the patient in a transitive sentence, giving the equivalent of "me run".
Only in transitive sentences would the equivalent of the pronoun "I" be used.
In this way the semantic roles can map onto the grammatical relations in different ways, grouping an intransitive subject either with Agents (accusative type) or Patients (ergative type) or even making each of the three roles differently, which is called the tripartite type.
The shared features of languages which belong to the same typological class type may have arisen completely independently.
Their co-occurrence might be due to universal laws governing the structure of natural languages, "language universals", or they might be the result of languages evolving convergent solutions to the recurring communicative problems that humans use language to solve.
While humans have the ability to learn any language, they only do so if they grow up in an environment in which language exists and is used by others.
Language is therefore dependent on communities of speakers in which children learn language from their elders and peers and themselves transmit language to their own children.
Languages are used by those who speak them to communicate and to solve a plethora of social tasks.
Many aspects of language use can be seen to be adapted specifically to these purposes.
Owing to the way in which language is transmitted between generations and within communities, language perpetually changes, diversifying into new languages or converging due to language contact.
The process is similar to the process of evolution, where the process of descent with modification leads to the formation of a phylogenetic tree.
However, languages differ from biological organisms in that they readily incorporate elements from other languages through the process of diffusion, as speakers of different languages come into contact.
Humans also frequently speak more than one language, acquiring their first language or languages as children, or learning new languages as they grow up.
Because of the increased language contact in the globalizing world, many small languages are becoming endangered as their speakers shift to other languages that afford the possibility to participate in larger and more influential speech communities.
When studying the way in which words and signs are used, it is often the case that words have different meanings, depending on the social context of use.
An important example of this is the process called deixis, which describes the way in which certain words refer to entities through their relation between a specific point in time and space when the word is uttered.
Such words are, for example, the word, "I" (which designates the person speaking), "now" (which designates the moment of speaking), and "here" (which designates the position of speaking).
Signs also change their meanings over time, as the conventions governing their usage gradually change.
The study of how the meaning of linguistic expressions changes depending on context is called pragmatics.
Deixis is an important part of the way that we use language to point out entities in the world.
Pragmatics is concerned with the ways in which language use is patterned and how these patterns contribute to meaning.
For example, in all languages, linguistic expressions can be used not just to transmit information, but to perform actions.
Certain actions are made only through language, but nonetheless have tangible effects, e.
These types of acts are called speech acts, although they can also be carried out through writing or hand signing.
The form of linguistic expression often does not correspond to the meaning that it actually has in a social context.
For example, if at a dinner table a person asks, "Can you reach the salt?
This meaning is implied by the context in which it is spoken; these kinds of effects of meaning are called conversational implicatures.
These social rules for which ways of using language are considered appropriate in certain situations and how utterances are to be understood in relation to their context vary between communities, and learning them is a large part of acquiring communicative competence in a language.
All healthy, normally developing human beings learn to use language.
Children acquire the language or languages used around them: whichever languages they receive sufficient exposure to during childhood.
The development is essentially the same for children acquiring sign or oral languages.
This learning process is referred to as first-language acquisition, since unlike many other kinds of learning, it requires no direct teaching or specialized study.
In The Descent of Man, naturalist Charles Darwin called this process "an instinctive tendency to acquire an art".
First language acquisition proceeds in a fairly regular sequence, though there is a wide degree of variation in the timing of particular stages among normally developing infants.
Studies published in 2013 have indicated that unborn fetuses are capable of language acquisition to some degree.
From birth, newborns respond more readily to human speech than to other sounds.
Around one month of age, babies appear to be able to distinguish between different speech sounds.
Around six months of age, a child will begin babbling, producing the speech sounds or handshapes of the languages used around them.
Words appear around the age of 12 to 18 months; the average vocabulary of an eighteen-month-old child is around 50 words.
A child's first utterances are holophrases (literally "whole-sentences"), utterances that use just one word to communicate some idea.
Several months after a child begins producing words, the child will produce two-word utterances, and within a few more months will begin to produce telegraphic speech, or short sentences that are less grammatically complex than adult speech, but that do show regular syntactic structure.
From roughly the age of three to five years, a child's ability to speak or sign is refined to the point that it resembles adult language.
Acquisition of second and additional languages can come at any age, through exposure in daily life or courses.
Children learning a second language are more likely to achieve native-like fluency than adults, but in general, it is very rare for someone speaking a second language to pass completely for a native speaker.
An important difference between first language acquisition and additional language acquisition is that the process of additional language acquisition is influenced by languages that the learner already knows.
Languages, understood as the particular set of speech norms of a particular community, are also a part of the larger culture of the community that speaks them.
Languages differ not only in pronunciation, vocabulary, and grammar, but also through having different "cultures of speaking.
Even among speakers of one language, several different ways of using the language exist, and each is used to signal affiliation with particular subgroups within a larger culture.
Linguists and anthropologists, particularly sociolinguists, ethnolinguists, and linguistic anthropologists have specialized in studying how ways of speaking vary between speech communities.
Linguists use the term "varieties" to refer to the different ways of speaking a language.
This term includes geographically or socioculturally defined dialects as well as the jargons or styles of subcultures.
Linguistic anthropologists and sociologists of language define communicative style as the ways that language is used and understood within a particular culture.
Because norms for language use are shared by members of a specific group, communicative style also becomes a way of displaying and constructing group identity.
Linguistic differences may become salient markers of divisions between social groups, for example, speaking a language with a particular accent may imply membership of an ethnic minority or social class, one's area of origin, or status as a second language speaker.
These kinds of differences are not part of the linguistic system, but are an important part of how people use language as a social tool for constructing groups.
However, many languages also have grammatical conventions that signal the social position of the speaker in relation to others through the use of registers that are related to social hierarchies or divisions.
In many languages, there are stylistic or even grammatical differences between the ways men and women speak, between age groups, or between social classes, just as some languages employ different words depending on who is listening.
For example, in the Australian language Dyirbal, a married man must use a special set of words to refer to everyday items when speaking in the presence of his mother-in-law.
Some cultures, for example, have elaborate systems of "social deixis", or systems of signalling social distance through linguistic means.
In English, social deixis is shown mostly through distinguishing between addressing some people by first name and others by surname, and in titles such as "Mrs.
For instance, in languages of east Asia such as Thai, Burmese, and Javanese, different words are used according to whether a speaker is addressing someone of higher or lower rank than oneself in a ranking system with animals and children ranking the lowest and gods and members of royalty as the highest.
Throughout history a number of different ways of representing language in graphic media have been invented.
These are called writing systems.
The use of writing has made language even more useful to humans.
It makes it possible to store large amounts of information outside of the human body and retrieve it again, and it allows communication across physical distances and timespans that would otherwise be impossible.
Many languages conventionally employ different genres, styles, and registers in written and spoken language, and in some communities, writing traditionally takes place in an entirely different language than the one spoken.
There is some evidence that the use of writing also has effects on the cognitive development of humans, perhaps because acquiring literacy generally requires explicit and formal education.
The invention of the first writing systems is roughly contemporary with the beginning of the Bronze Age in the late 4th millennium BC.
The Sumerian archaic cuneiform script and the Egyptian hieroglyphs are generally considered to be the earliest writing systems, both emerging out of their ancestral proto-literate symbol systems from 3400 to 3200 BC with the earliest coherent texts from about 2600 BC.
It is generally agreed that Sumerian writing was an independent invention; however, it is debated whether Egyptian writing was developed completely independently of Sumerian, or was a case of cultural diffusion.
A similar debate exists for the Chinese script, which developed around 1200 BC.
The pre-Columbian Mesoamerican writing systems (including among others Olmec and Maya scripts) are generally believed to have had independent origins.
All languages change as speakers adopt or invent new ways of speaking and pass them on to other members of their speech community.
Language change happens at all levels from the phonological level to the levels of vocabulary, morphology, syntax, and discourse.
Even though language change is often initially evaluated negatively by speakers of the language who often consider changes to be "decay" or a sign of slipping norms of language usage, it is natural and inevitable.
Changes may affect specific sounds or the entire phonological system.
Sound change can consist of the replacement of one speech sound or phonetic feature by another, the complete loss of the affected sound, or even the introduction of a new sound in a place where there had been none.
Sound changes can be conditioned in which case a sound is changed only if it occurs in the vicinity of certain other sounds.
Sound change is usually assumed to be regular, which means that it is expected to apply mechanically whenever its structural conditions are met, irrespective of any non-phonological factors.
On the other hand, sound changes can sometimes be sporadic, affecting only one particular word or a few words, without any seeming regularity.
Sometimes a simple change triggers a chain shift in which the entire phonological system is affected.
This happened in the Germanic languages when the sound change known as Grimm's law affected all the stop consonants in the system.
The original consonant *bʰ became /b/ in the Germanic languages, the previous *b in turn became /p/, and the previous *p became /f/.
The same process applied to all stop consonants and explains why Italic languages such as Latin have p in words like pater and pisces, whereas Germanic languages, like English, have father and fish.
Another example is the Great Vowel Shift in English, which is the reason that the spelling of English vowels do not correspond well to their current pronunciation.
This is because the vowel shift brought the already established orthography out of synchronization with pronunciation.
Another source of sound change is the erosion of words as pronunciation gradually becomes increasingly indistinct and shortens words, leaving out syllables or sounds.
This kind of change caused Latin mea domina to eventually become the French madame and American English ma'am.
Change also happens in the grammar of languages as discourse patterns such as idioms or particular constructions become grammaticalized.
This frequently happens when words or morphemes erode and the grammatical system is unconsciously rearranged to compensate for the lost element.
For example, in some varieties of Caribbean Spanish the final /s/ has eroded away.
Since Standard Spanish uses final /s/ in the morpheme marking the second person subject "you" in verbs, the Caribbean varieties now have to express the second person using the pronoun tú.
This means that the sentence "what's your name" is ¿como te llamas?
The simple sound change has affected both morphology and syntax.
Another common cause of grammatical change is the gradual petrification of idioms into new grammatical forms, for example, the way the English "going to" construction lost its aspect of movement and in some varieties of English has almost become a full-fledged future tense (e.
Language change may be motivated by "language internal" factors, such as changes in pronunciation motivated by certain sounds being difficult to distinguish aurally or to produce, or through patterns of change that cause some rare types of constructions to drift towards more common types.
Other causes of language change are social, such as when certain pronunciations become emblematic of membership in certain groups, such as social classes, or with ideologies, and therefore are adopted by those who wish to identify with those groups or ideas.
In this way, issues of identity and politics can have profound effects on language structure.
One source of language change is contact and the resulting diffusion of linguistic traits between languages.
Language contact occurs when speakers of two or more languages or varieties interact on a regular basis.
Multilingualism is likely to have been the norm throughout human history and most people in the modern world are multilingual.
Before the rise of the concept of the ethno-national state, monolingualism was characteristic mainly of populations inhabiting small islands.
But with the ideology that made one people, one state, and one language the most desirable political arrangement, monolingualism started to spread throughout the world.
There are only 250 countries in the world corresponding to some 6,000 languages, which means that most countries are multilingual and most languages therefore exist in close contact with other languages.
When speakers of different languages interact closely, it is typical for their languages to influence each other.
Through sustained language contact over long periods, linguistic traits diffuse between languages, and languages belonging to different families may converge to become more similar.
In areas where many languages are in close contact, this may lead to the formation of language areas in which unrelated languages share a number of linguistic features.
A number of such language areas have been documented, among them, the Balkan language area, the Mesoamerican language area, and the Ethiopian language area.
Also, larger areas such as South Asia, Europe, and Southeast Asia have sometimes been considered language areas because of the widespread diffusion of specific areal features.
Language contact may also lead to a variety of other linguistic phenomena, including language convergence, borrowing, and relexification (the replacement of much of the native vocabulary with that of another language).
In situations of extreme and sustained language contact, it may lead to the formation of new mixed languages that cannot be considered to belong to a single language family.
One type of mixed language called pidgins occurs when adult speakers of two different languages interact on a regular basis, but in a situation where neither group learns to speak the language of the other group fluently.
In such a case, they will often construct a communication form that has traits of both languages, and that has a simplified grammatical and phonological structure.
The language comes to contain mostly the grammatical and phonological categories that exist in both languages.
Pidgin languages are defined by not having any native speakers, but only being spoken by people who have another language as their first language.
But if the Pidgin language becomes the main language of a speech community, then eventually children will grow up learning the Pidgin language as their first language.
As the generation of child learners grows up, the pidgin will often be seen to change its structure and acquire a greater degree of complexity.
This type of language is generally called a creole language.
An example of such mixed languages is Tok Pisin, the official language of Papua New Guinea, which originally arose as a Pidgin based on English and Austronesian languages; others are Kreyòl ayisyen, the French-based creole language spoken in Haiti, and Michif, a mixed language of Canada, based on the Native American language Cree and French.
SIL Ethnologue defines a "living language" as "one that has at least one speaker for whom it is their first language".
The exact number of known living languages varies from 6,000 to 7,000, depending on the precision of one's definition of "language", and in particular, on how one defines the distinction between a "language" and a "dialect".
As of 2026, Ethnologue cataloged 7,170 living human languages.
The Ethnologue establishes linguistic groups based on studies of mutual intelligibility, and therefore often includes more categories than more conservative classifications.
For example, the Danish language that most scholars consider a single language with several dialects is classified as two distinct languages (Danish and Jutish) by the Ethnologue.
According to the Ethnologue, 389 languages (nearly 6%) have more than a million speakers.
These languages together account for 94% of the world's population, whereas 94% of the world's languages account for the remaining 6% of the global population.
There is no clear distinction between a language and a dialect, notwithstanding a famous aphorism attributed to linguist Max Weinreich that "a language is a dialect with an army and navy".
For example, national boundaries frequently override linguistic difference in determining whether two linguistic varieties are languages or dialects.
Hakka, Cantonese and Mandarin are, for example, often classified as "dialects" of Chinese, even though they are more different from each other than Swedish is from Norwegian.
Before the Yugoslav Wars, Serbo-Croatian was generally considered a single language with two normative variants, but due to sociopolitical reasons, Croatian and Serbian are now often treated as separate languages and employ different writing systems.
In other words, the distinction may hinge on political considerations as much as on cultural differences as on distinctive writing systems or the degree of mutual intelligibility.
The latter is, in fact, a rather unreliable criterion to discriminate languages and dialects.
Pluricentric languages, which are languages with more than one standard variety, are a case in point.
Standard American English and Standard RP (English) English, for instance, may in some areas be more different than languages with names, e.
Swedish and Norwegian.
A complex social process of "language making" underlies these assignments of status and in some cases even linguistic experts may not agree (e.
The language making process is dynamic and subject to change over time.
The world's languages can be grouped into language families consisting of languages that can be shown to have common ancestry.
Linguists recognize many hundreds of language families, although some of them can possibly be grouped into larger units as more evidence becomes available and in-depth studies are carried out.
At present, there are also dozens of language isolates: languages that cannot be shown to be related to any other languages in the world.
Among them are Basque, spoken in Europe, Zuni of New Mexico, Purépecha of Mexico, Ainu of Japan, Burushaski of Pakistan, and many others.
The language family of the world that has the most speakers is the Indo-European languages, spoken by 46% of the world's population.
This family includes major world languages like English, Spanish, French, German, Russian, and Hindustani (Hindi/Urdu).
The Indo-European family spread first through hypothesized Indo-European migrations that would have taken place some time in the period c.
The Sino-Tibetan languages are spoken by 20% of the world's population and include many of the languages of East Asia, including Hakka, Mandarin Chinese, Cantonese, and hundreds of smaller languages.
Africa is home to a large number of language families, the largest of which is the Niger-Congo language family, which includes such languages as Swahili, Shona, and Yoruba.
Speakers of the Niger-Congo languages account for 6.
A similar number of people speak the Afroasiatic languages, which include the populous Semitic languages such as Arabic, Hebrew language, and the languages of the Sahara region, such as the Berber languages and Hausa.
The Austronesian languages are spoken by 5.
It includes such languages as Malagasy, Māori, Samoan, and many of the indigenous languages of Indonesia and Taiwan.
The Austronesian languages are considered to have originated in Taiwan around 3000 BC and spread through the Oceanic region through island-hopping, based on an advanced nautical technology.
Other populous language families are the Dravidian languages of South Asia (among them Kannada, Tamil, and Telugu), the Turkic languages of Central Asia (such as Turkish), the Austroasiatic (among them Khmer), and Tai–Kadai languages of Southeast Asia (including Thai).
The areas of the world in which there is the greatest linguistic diversity, such as the Americas, Papua New Guinea, West Africa, and South-Asia, contain hundreds of small language families.
These areas together account for the majority of the world's languages, though not the majority of speakers.
In the Americas, some of the largest language families include the Quechua, Arawak, and Tupi-Guarani families of South America, the Uto-Aztecan, Oto-Manguean, and Mayan of Mesoamerica, and the Na-Dene, Iroquoian, and Algonquian language families of North America.
In Australia, most indigenous languages belong to the Pama-Nyungan family, whereas New Guinea is home to a large number of small families and isolates, as well as a number of Austronesian languages.
Due to its remoteness and geographical fragmentation, Papua New Guinea emerges in fact as the leading location worldwide for both species (8% of world total) and linguistic richness – with 830 living tongues (12% of world total).
Language endangerment occurs when a language is at risk of falling out of use as its speakers die out or shift to speaking another language.
Language loss occurs when the language has no more native speakers, and becomes a dead language.
If eventually no one speaks the language at all, it becomes an extinct language.
While languages have always gone extinct throughout human history, they have been disappearing at an accelerated rate in the 20th and 21st centuries due to the processes of globalization and neo-colonialism, where the economically powerful languages dominate other languages.
The more commonly spoken languages dominate the less commonly spoken languages, so the less commonly spoken languages eventually disappear from populations.
Of the between 6,000 and 7,000 languages spoken as of 2010, between 50 and 90% of those are expected to have become extinct by the year 2100.
The top 20 languages, those spoken by more than 50 million speakers each, are spoken by 50% of the world's population, whereas many of the other languages are spoken by smaller communities, most of them with less than 10,000 speakers.
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) operates with five levels of language endangerment: "safe", "vulnerable" (not spoken by children outside the home), "definitely endangered" (not spoken by children), "severely endangered" (only spoken by the oldest generations), and "critically endangered" (spoken by a few members of the oldest generation, often semi-speakers).
Despite claims that the world would be better off if most adopted a single common lingua franca, such as English or Esperanto, there is a consensus that the loss of languages harms the cultural diversity of the world.
It is a common belief, going back to the biblical narrative of the tower of Babel in the Old Testament, that linguistic diversity causes political conflict, but many of the world's major episodes of violence have taken place in situations with low linguistic diversity, such as the Yugoslav and American Civil War, or the genocide of Rwanda.
Many projects aim to prevent or slow this loss by revitalizing endangered languages and promoting education and literacy in minority languages.
Across the world, many countries have enacted specific legislation to protect and stabilize the language of indigenous speech communities.
A minority of linguists have argued that language loss is a natural process that should not be counteracted and that documenting endangered languages for posterity is sufficient.
The University of Waikato is using the Welsh language as a model for their Māori language revitalisation programme, as they deem Welsh to be the world's leading example for the survival of languages.
In 2019, Hawaiian TV company Oiwi visited a Welsh language centre in Nant Gwrtheyrn, North Wales, to help find ways of preserving their Ōlelo Hawaiʻi language.
Crystal, David (1997).
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cysouw, Michael; Good, Jeff (2013).
Language Documentation and Conservation.
Allison Parshall, "Pain Language: The sound of 'ow' transcends borders", Scientific American, vol.
These cases run counter to decades of linguistic theory, which had regarded language as fundamentally arbitrary.
Also] there's the 'bouba-kiki' effect, whereby people from varying cultures are more likely to associate the nonsense word 'bouba' with a rounded shape and 'kiki' with a spiked one.
Stix, Gary, "Thinking without Words: Cognition doesn't require language, it turns out" (interview with Evelina Fedorenko, a cognitive neuroscientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology), Scientific American, vol.
Swadesh, Morris (1934).
Art is a diverse range of cultural activity centered around works utilizing creative or imaginative talents, which are expected to evoke a worthwhile experience, generally through an expression of emotional power, conceptual ideas, technical proficiency, or beauty.
There is no generally agreed definition of what constitutes art, and its interpretation has varied greatly throughout history and across cultures.
In the Western tradition, the three classical branches of visual art are painting, sculpture, and architecture.
Theatre, dance, and other performing arts, as well as literature, music, film and other media such as interactive media, are included in a broader definition of "the arts".
Until the 17th century, art referred to any skill or mastery and was not differentiated from crafts or sciences.
In modern usage after the 17th century, where aesthetic considerations are paramount, the fine arts are separated and distinguished from acquired skills in general, such as the decorative or applied arts.
The nature of art and related concepts, such as creativity and interpretation, are explored in a branch of philosophy known as aesthetics.
The resulting artworks are studied in the professional fields of art criticism and the history of art.
In the perspective of the history of art, artistic works have existed for almost as long as humankind: from early prehistoric art to contemporary art; however, some theorists think that the typical concept of "artistic works" does not fit well outside modern Western societies.
One early sense of the definition of art is closely related to the older Latin meaning, which roughly translates to "skill" or "craft", as associated with words such as "artisan".
English words derived from this meaning include artifact, artificial, artifice, medical arts, and military arts.
However, there are many other colloquial uses of the word, all with some relation to its etymology.
Over time, philosophers like Plato, Aristotle, Socrates and Immanuel Kant, among others, questioned the meaning of art.
Several dialogues in Plato tackle questions about art, while Socrates says that poetry is inspired by the muses and is not rational.
He speaks approvingly of this, and other forms of divine madness (drunkenness, eroticism, and dreaming) in the Phaedrus (265a–c), and yet in the Republic wants to outlaw Homer's great poetic art, and laughter as well.
In Ion, Socrates gives no hint of the disapproval of Homer that he expresses in the Republic.
The dialogue Ion suggests that Homer's Iliad functioned in the ancient Greek world as the Bible does today in the modern Christian world: as divinely inspired literary art that can provide moral guidance, if only it can be properly interpreted.
With regards to the literary art and the musical arts, Aristotle considered epic poetry, tragedy, comedy, Dithyrambic poetry and music to be mimetic or imitative art, each varying in imitation by medium, object, and manner.
For example, music imitates with the media of rhythm and harmony, whereas dance imitates with rhythm alone, and poetry with language.
The forms also differ in their object of imitation.
Comedy, for instance, is a dramatic imitation of men worse than average; whereas tragedy imitates men slightly better than average.
Lastly, the forms differ in their manner of imitation—through narrative or character, through change or no change, and through drama or no drama.
Aristotle believed that imitation is natural to mankind and constitutes one of mankind's advantages over animals.
The more recent and specific sense of the word art as an abbreviation for creative art or fine art emerged in the early 17th century.
Fine art refers to a skill used to express the artist's creativity, or to engage the audience's aesthetic sensibilities, or to draw the audience towards consideration of more refined or finer works of art.
Within this latter sense, the word art may refer to several things: (i) a study of a creative skill, (ii) a process of using the creative skill, (iii) a product of the creative skill, or (iv) the audience's experience with the creative skill.
The creative arts (art as discipline) are a collection of disciplines which produce artworks (art as objects) that are compelled by a personal drive (art as activity) and convey a message, mood, or symbolism for the perceiver to interpret (art as experience).
Art is something that stimulates an individual's thoughts, emotions, beliefs, or ideas through the senses.
Works of art can be explicitly made for this purpose or interpreted on the basis of images or objects.
For some scholars, such as Kant, the sciences and the arts could be distinguished by taking science as representing the domain of knowledge and the arts as representing the domain of the freedom of artistic expression.
Often, if the skill is being used in a common or practical way, people will consider it a craft instead of art.
Likewise, if the skill is being used in a commercial or industrial way, it may be considered commercial art instead of fine art.
On the other hand, crafts and design are sometimes considered applied art.
Some art followers have argued that the difference between fine art and applied art has more to do with value judgments made about the art than any clear definitional difference.
However, even fine art often has goals beyond pure creativity and self-expression.
The purpose of works of art may be to communicate ideas, such as in politically, spiritually, or philosophically motivated art; to create a sense of beauty (see aesthetics); to explore the nature of perception; for pleasure; or to generate strong emotions.
The purpose may also be seemingly nonexistent.
The nature of art has been described by philosopher Richard Wollheim as "one of the most elusive of the traditional problems of human culture".
Art has been defined as a vehicle for the expression or communication of emotions and ideas, a means for exploring and appreciating formal elements for their own sake, and as mimesis or representation.
Art as mimesis has deep roots in the philosophy of Aristotle.
Leo Tolstoy identified art as a use of indirect means to communicate from one person to another.
Benedetto Croce and R.
Collingwood advanced the idealist view that art expresses emotions, and that the work of art therefore essentially exists in the mind of the creator.
The theory of art as form has its roots in the philosophy of Kant, and was developed in the early 20th century by Roger Fry and Clive Bell.
More recently, thinkers influenced by Martin Heidegger have interpreted art as the means by which a community develops for itself a medium for self-expression and interpretation.
George Dickie has offered an institutional theory of art that defines a work of art as any artifact upon which a qualified person or persons acting on behalf of the social institution commonly referred to as "the art world" has conferred "the status of candidate for appreciation".
Larry Shiner has described fine art as "not an essence or a fate but something we have made.
Art as we have generally understood it is a European invention barely two hundred years old.
Art may be characterized in terms of mimesis (its representation of reality), narrative (storytelling), expression, communication of emotion, or other qualities.
During the Romantic period, art came to be seen as "a special faculty of the human mind to be classified with religion and science".
A shell engraved by Homo erectus was determined to be between 430,000 and 540,000 years old.
A set of eight 130,000 years old white-tailed eagle talons bear cut marks and abrasion that indicate manipulation by neanderthals, possibly for using it as jewelry.
A series of tiny, drilled snail shells about 75,000 years old—were discovered in a South African cave.
Containers that may have been used to hold paints have been found dating as far back as 100,000 years.
The oldest piece of art found in Europe is the Riesenhirschknochen der Einhornhöhle, dating back 51,000 years and made by Neanderthals.
Sculptures, cave paintings, rock paintings and petroglyphs from the Upper Paleolithic dating to roughly 40,000 years ago have been found, but the precise meaning of such art is often disputed because so little is known about the cultures that produced them.
The first undisputed sculptures and similar art pieces, like the Venus of Hohle Fels, are the numerous objects found at the Caves and Ice Age Art in the Swabian Jura UNESCO World Heritage Site, where the oldest non-stationary works of human art yet discovered were found, in the form of carved animal and humanoid figurines, in addition to the oldest musical instruments unearthed so far, with the artifacts dating between 43,000 and 35,000 BC, so being the first centre of human art.
Many great traditions in art have a foundation in the art of one of the great ancient civilizations: Ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia, Persia, India, China, Ancient Greece, Rome, as well as Inca, Maya, and Olmec.
Each of these centers of early civilization developed a unique and characteristic style in its art.
Because of the size and duration of these civilizations, more of their art works have survived and more of their influence has been transmitted to other cultures and later times.
Some also have provided the first records of how artists worked.
For example, this period of Greek art saw a veneration of the human physical form and the development of equivalent skills to show musculature, poise, beauty, and anatomically correct proportions.
In Byzantine and Medieval art of the Western Middle Ages, much art focused on the expression of subjects about biblical and religious culture, and used styles that showed the higher glory of a heavenly world, such as the use of gold in the background of paintings, or glass in mosaics or windows, which also presented figures in idealized, patterned (flat) forms.
Nevertheless, a classical realist tradition persisted in small Byzantine works, and realism steadily grew in the art of Catholic Europe.
Renaissance art had a greatly increased emphasis on the realistic depiction of the material world, and the place of humans in it, reflected in the corporeality of the human body, and development of a systematic method of graphical perspective to depict recession in a three-dimensional picture space.
In the east, Islamic art's rejection of iconography led to emphasis on geometric patterns, calligraphy, and architecture.
Further east, religion dominated artistic styles and forms too.
India and Tibet saw emphasis on painted sculptures and dance, while religious painting borrowed many conventions from sculpture and tended to bright contrasting colors with emphasis on outlines.
China saw the flourishing of many art forms: jade carving, bronzework, pottery (including the stunning Terracotta Army of Emperor Qin), poetry, calligraphy, music, painting, drama, fiction, etc.
Chinese styles vary greatly from era to era and each one is traditionally named after the ruling dynasty.
So, for example, Tang dynasty paintings are monochromatic and sparse, emphasizing idealized landscapes, but Ming dynasty paintings are busy and colorful, and focus on telling stories via setting and composition.
Japan names its styles after imperial dynasties too, and also saw much interplay between the styles of calligraphy and painting.
Woodblock printing became important in Japan after the 17th century.
The western Age of Enlightenment in the 18th century saw artistic depictions of physical and rational certainties of the clockwork universe, as well as politically revolutionary visions of a post-monarchist world, such as Blake's portrayal of Newton as a divine geometer, or David's propagandistic paintings.
This led to Romantic rejections of this in favor of pictures of the emotional side and individuality of humans, exemplified in the novels of Goethe.
The late 19th century then saw a host of artistic movements, such as academic art, Symbolism, impressionism and fauvism among others.
The history of 20th-century art is a narrative of endless possibilities and the search for new standards, each being torn down in succession by the next.
Thus the parameters of Impressionism, Expressionism, Fauvism, Cubism, Dadaism, Surrealism, etc.
Increasing global interaction during this time saw an equivalent influence of other cultures into Western art.
Thus, Japanese woodblock prints (themselves influenced by Western Renaissance draftsmanship) had an immense influence on impressionism and subsequent development.
Later, African sculptures were taken up by Picasso and to some extent by Matisse.
Similarly, in the 19th and 20th centuries the West has had huge impacts on Eastern art with originally western ideas like Communism and Post-Modernism exerting a powerful influence.
Modernism, the idealistic search for truth, gave way in the latter half of the 20th century to a realization of its unattainability.
Adorno said in 1970, "It is now taken for granted that nothing which concerns art can be taken for granted any more: neither art itself, nor art in relationship to the whole, nor even the right of art to exist.
Furthermore, the separation of cultures is increasingly blurred and some argue it is now more appropriate to think in terms of a global culture, rather than of regional ones.
In The Origin of the Work of Art, Martin Heidegger, a German philosopher and seminal thinker, describes the essence of art in terms of the concepts of being and truth.
He argues that art is not only a way of expressing the element of truth in a culture, but the means of creating it and providing a springboard from which "that which is" can be revealed.
Works of art are not merely representations of the way things are, but actually produce a community's shared understanding.
Each time a new artwork is added to any culture, the meaning of what it is to exist is inherently changed.
Historically, art and artistic skills and ideas have often been spread through trade.
An example of this is the Silk Road, where Hellenistic, Iranian, Indian and Chinese influences could mix.
Greco Buddhist art is one of the most vivid examples of this interaction.
The meeting of different cultures and worldviews also influenced artistic creation.
An example of this is the multicultural port metropolis of Trieste at the beginning of the 20th century, where James Joyce met writers from Central Europe and the artistic development of New York City as a cultural melting pot.
The creative arts are often divided into more specific categories, typically along perceptually distinguishable categories such as media, genre, styles, and form.
Art form refers to the elements of art that are independent of its interpretation or significance.
It covers the methods adopted by the artist and the physical composition of the artwork, primarily non-semantic aspects of the work (i.
Form may also include Design principles, such as arrangement, balance, contrast, emphasis, harmony, proportion, proximity, and rhythm.
In general there are three schools of philosophy regarding art, focusing respectively on form, content, and context.
Extreme Formalism is the view that all aesthetic properties of art are formal (that is, part of the art form).
Philosophers almost universally reject this view and hold that the properties and aesthetics of art extend beyond materials, techniques, and form.
Unfortunately, there is little consensus on terminology for these informal properties.
Some authors refer to subject matter and content—i.
Extreme Intentionalism holds that authorial intent plays a decisive role in the meaning of a work of art, conveying the content or essential main idea, while all other interpretations can be discarded.
It defines the subject as the persons or idea represented, and the content as the artist's experience of that subject.
For example, the composition of Napoleon I on his Imperial Throne is partly borrowed from the Statue of Zeus at Olympia.
As evidenced by the title, the subject is Napoleon, and the content is Ingres's representation of Napoleon as "Emperor-God beyond time and space".
Similarly to extreme formalism, philosophers typically reject extreme intentionalism, because art may have multiple ambiguous meanings and authorial intent may be unknowable and thus irrelevant.
Its restrictive interpretation is "socially unhealthy, philosophically unreal, and politically unwise".
Finally, the developing theory of post-structuralism studies art's significance in a cultural context, such as the ideas, emotions, and reactions prompted by a work.
The cultural context often reduces to the artist's techniques and intentions, in which case analysis proceeds along lines similar to formalism and intentionalism.
However, in other cases historical and material conditions may predominate, such as religious and philosophical convictions, sociopolitical and economic structures, or even climate and geography.
Art criticism continues to grow and develop alongside art.
Art can connote a sense of trained ability or mastery of a medium.
Art can also refer to the developed and efficient use of a language to convey meaning with immediacy or depth.
Art can be defined as an act of expressing feelings, thoughts, and observations.
There is an understanding that is reached with the material as a result of handling it, which facilitates one's thought processes.
A common view is that the epithet art, particular in its elevated sense, requires a certain level of creative expertise by the artist, whether this be a demonstration of technical ability, an originality in stylistic approach, or a combination of these two.
Traditionally skill of execution was viewed as a quality inseparable from art and thus necessary for its success; for Leonardo da Vinci, art, neither more nor less than his other endeavors, was a manifestation of skill.
Rembrandt's work, now praised for its ephemeral virtues, was most admired by his contemporaries for its virtuosity.
At the turn of the 20th century, the adroit performances of John Singer Sargent were alternately admired and viewed with skepticism for their manual fluency, yet at nearly the same time the artist who would become the era's most recognized and peripatetic iconoclast, Pablo Picasso, was completing a traditional academic training at which he excelled.
A common contemporary criticism of some modern art occurs along the lines of objecting to the apparent lack of skill or ability required in the production of the artistic object.
In conceptual art, Marcel Duchamp's Fountain is among the first examples of pieces wherein the artist used found objects ("ready-made") and exercised no traditionally recognized set of skills.
Tracey Emin's My Bed, or Damien Hirst's The Physical Impossibility of Death in the Mind of Someone Living follow this example.
Emin slept (and engaged in other activities) in her bed before placing the result in a gallery as work of art.
Hirst came up with the conceptual design for the artwork but has left most of the eventual creation of many works to employed artisans.
Hirst's celebrity is founded entirely on his ability to produce shocking concepts.
The actual production in many conceptual and contemporary works of art is a matter of assembly of found objects.
However, there are many modernist and contemporary artists who continue to excel in the skills of drawing and painting and in creating hands-on works of art.
Art has had a great number of different functions throughout its history, making its purpose difficult to abstract or quantify to any single concept.
This does not imply that the purpose of art is "vague", but that it has had many unique, different reasons for being created.
Some of these functions of art are provided in the following outline.
The different purposes of art may be grouped according to those that are non-motivated, and those that are motivated (Lévi-Strauss).
The non-motivated purposes of art are those that are integral to being human, transcend the individual, or do not fulfill a specific external purpose.
In this sense, Art, as creativity, is something humans must do by their very nature (i.
Basic human instinct for harmony, balance, rhythm.
Art at this level is not an action or an object, but an internal appreciation of balance and harmony (beauty), and therefore an aspect of being human beyond utility.
Imitation, then, is one instinct of our nature.
Next, there is the instinct for 'harmony' and rhythm, meters being manifestly sections of rhythm.
Persons, therefore, starting with this natural gift developed by degrees their special aptitudes, till their rude improvisations gave birth to Poetry.
Experience of the mysterious.
Art provides a way to experience one's self in relation to the universe.
This experience may often come unmotivated, as one appreciates art, music or poetry.
The most beautiful thing we can experience is the mysterious.
It is the source of all true art and science.
Expression of the imagination.
Art provides a means to express the imagination in non-grammatic ways that are not tied to the formality of spoken or written language.
Unlike words, which come in sequences and each of which have a definite meaning, art provides a range of forms, symbols and ideas with meanings that are malleable.
Jupiter's eagle [as an example of art] is not, like logical (aesthetic) attributes of an object, the concept of the sublimity and majesty of creation, but rather something else—something that gives the imagination an incentive to spread its flight over a whole host of kindred representations that provoke more thought than admits of expression in a concept determined by words.
They furnish an aesthetic idea, which serves the above rational idea as a substitute for logical presentation, but with the proper function, however, of animating the mind by opening out for it a prospect into a field of kindred representations stretching beyond its ken.
Ritualistic and symbolic functions.
In many cultures, art is used in rituals, performances and dances as a decoration or symbol.
While these often have no specific utilitarian (motivated) purpose, anthropologists know that they often serve a purpose at the level of meaning within a particular culture.
This meaning is not furnished by any one individual, but is often the result of many generations of change, and of a cosmological relationship within the culture.
Most scholars who deal with rock paintings or objects recovered from prehistoric contexts that cannot be explained in utilitarian terms and are thus categorized as decorative, ritual or symbolic, are aware of the trap posed by the term 'art'.
Motivated purposes of art refer to intentional, conscious actions on the part of the artists or creator.
These may be to bring about political change, to comment on an aspect of society, to convey a specific emotion or mood, to address personal psychology, to illustrate another discipline, to (with commercial arts) sell a product, or used as a form of communication.
Art, at its simplest, is a form of communication.
As most forms of communication have an intent or goal directed toward another individual, this is a motivated purpose.
Illustrative arts, such as scientific illustration, are a form of art as communication.
Maps are another example.
However, the content need not be scientific.
Emotions, moods and feelings are also communicated through art.
Art as entertainment.
Art may seek to bring about a particular emotion or mood, for the purpose of relaxing or entertaining the viewer.
This is often the function of the art industries of motion pictures and video games.
Art for political change.
One of the defining functions of early 20th-century art has been to use visual images to bring about political change.
Art movements that had this goal—Dadaism, Surrealism, Russian constructivism, and Abstract Expressionism, among others—are collectively referred to as the avant-garde arts.
By contrast, the realistic attitude, inspired by positivism, from Saint Thomas Aquinas to Anatole France, clearly seems to me to be hostile to any intellectual or moral advancement.
I loathe it, for it is made up of mediocrity, hate, and dull conceit.
It is this attitude which today gives birth to these ridiculous books, these insulting plays.
It constantly feeds on and derives strength from the newspapers and stultifies both science and art by assiduously flattering the lowest of tastes; clarity bordering on stupidity, a dog's life.
Art as a "free zone", removed from the action of the social censure.
Unlike the avant-garde movements, which wanted to erase cultural differences in order to produce new universal values, contemporary art has enhanced its tolerance towards cultural differences as well as its critical and liberating functions (social inquiry, activism, subversion, deconstruction, etc.
Art for social inquiry, subversion or anarchy.
While similar to art for political change, subversive or deconstructivist art may seek to question aspects of society without any specific political goal.
In this case, the function of art may be used to criticize some aspect of society.
Graffiti art and other types of street art are graphics and images that are spray-painted or stencilled on publicly viewable walls, buildings, buses, trains, and bridges, usually without permission.
Certain art forms, such as graffiti, may also be illegal when they break laws (in this case vandalism).
Art for social causes.
Art can be used to raise awareness for a large variety of causes.
A number of art activities were aimed at raising awareness of autism, cancer, human trafficking, and a variety of other topics, such as ocean conservation, human rights in Darfur, murdered and missing Aboriginal women, elder abuse, and pollution.
Trashion, using trash to make fashion, practiced by artists such as Marina DeBris is one example of using art to raise awareness about pollution.
Art for psychological and healing purposes.
Art is also used by art therapists, psychotherapists and clinical psychologists as art therapy.
The Diagnostic Drawing Series, for example, is used to determine the personality and emotional functioning of a patient.
The end product is not the principal goal in this case, but rather a process of healing, through creative acts, is sought.
The resultant piece of artwork may also offer insight into the troubles experienced by the subject and may suggest suitable approaches to be used in more conventional forms of psychiatric therapy.
Art for propaganda, or commercialism.
Art is often used as a form of propaganda, and thus can be used to subtly influence popular conceptions or mood.
In a similar way, art that tries to sell a product also influences mood and emotion.
In both cases, the purpose of art here is to subtly manipulate the viewer into a particular emotional or psychological response toward a particular idea or object.
Art as a fitness indicator.
It has been argued that the ability of the human brain by far exceeds what was needed for survival in the ancestral environment.
One evolutionary psychology explanation for this is that the human brain and associated traits (such as artistic ability and creativity) are the human equivalent of the peacock's tail.
The purpose of the male peacock's extravagant tail has been argued to be to attract females (see also Fisherian runaway and handicap principle).
According to this theory superior execution of art was evolutionarily important because it attracted mates.
The functions of art described above are not mutually exclusive, as many of them may overlap.
For example, art for the purpose of entertainment may also seek to sell a product, i.
Art can be divided into any number of steps one can make an argument for.
This section divides the creative process into broad three steps, but there is no consensus on an exact number.
In the first step, the artist envisions the art in their mind.
By imagining what their art would look like, the artist begins the process of bringing the art into existence.
Preparation of art may involve approaching and researching the subject matter.
Artistic inspiration is one of the main drivers of art, and may be considered to stem from instinct, impressions, and feelings.
In the second step, the artist executes the creation of their work.
The creation of a piece can be affected by factors such as the artist's mood, surroundings, and mental state.
For example, The Black Paintings by Francisco de Goya, created in the elder years of his life, are thought to be so bleak because he was in isolation and because of his experience with war.
He painted them directly on the walls of his apartment in Spain, and most likely never discussed them with anyone.
The Beatles stated drugs such as LSD and cannabis influenced some of their greatest hits, such as Revolver.
Trial and error are considered an integral part of the creation process.
The last step is art appreciation, which has the sub-topic of critique.
In one study, over half of visual arts students agreed that reflection is an essential step of the art process.
According to education journals, the reflection of art is considered an essential part of the experience.
However an important aspect of art is that others may view and appreciate it as well.
While many focus on whether those viewing, listening, etc.
Art enjoyment can bring about a wide spectrum of emotion due to beauty.
Some art is meant to be practical, with its analysis studious, meant to stimulate discourse.
Since ancient times, much of the finest art has represented a deliberate display of wealth or power, often achieved by using massive scale and expensive materials.
Much art has been commissioned by political rulers or religious establishments, with more modest versions only available to the most wealthy in society.
Nevertheless, there have been many periods where art of very high quality was available, in terms of ownership, across large parts of society, above all in cheap media such as pottery, which persists in the ground, and perishable media such as textiles and wood.
In many different cultures, the ceramics of indigenous peoples of the Americas are found in such a wide range of graves that they were clearly not restricted to a social elite, though other forms of art may have been.
Reproductive methods such as moulds made mass-production easier, and were used to bring high-quality Ancient Roman pottery and Greek Tanagra figurines to a very wide market.
Cylinder seals were both artistic and practical, and very widely used by what can be loosely called the middle class in the Ancient Near East.
Once coins were widely used, these also became an art form that reached the widest range of society.
Another important innovation came in the 15th century in Europe, when printmaking began with small woodcuts, mostly religious, that were often very small and hand-colored, and affordable even by peasants who glued them to the walls of their homes.
Printed books were initially very expensive, but fell steadily in price until by the 19th century even the poorest could afford some with printed illustrations.
Popular prints of many different sorts have decorated homes and other places for centuries.
In 1661, the city of Basel, in Switzerland, opened the first public museum of art in the world, the Kunstmuseum Basel.
Today, its collection is distinguished by an impressively wide historic span, from the early 15th century up to the immediate present.
Its various areas of emphasis give it international standing as one of the most significant museums of its kind.
These encompass: paintings and drawings by artists active in the Upper Rhine region between 1400 and 1600, and on the art of the 19th to 21st centuries.
Public buildings and monuments, secular and religious, by their nature normally address the whole of society, and visitors as viewers, and display to the general public has long been an important factor in their design.
Egyptian temples are typical in that the most largest and most lavish decoration was placed on the parts that could be seen by the general public, rather than the areas seen only by the priests.
Many areas of royal palaces, castles and the houses of the social elite were often generally accessible, and large parts of the art collections of such people could often be seen, either by anybody, or by those able to pay a small price, or those wearing the correct clothes, regardless of who they were, as at the Palace of Versailles, where the appropriate extra accessories (silver shoe buckles and a sword) could be hired from shops outside.
Special arrangements were made to allow the public to see many royal or private collections placed in galleries, as with the Orleans Collection mostly housed in a wing of the Palais Royal in Paris, which could be visited for most of the 18th century.
In Italy the art tourism of the Grand Tour became a major industry from the Renaissance onwards, and governments and cities made efforts to make their key works accessible.
The British Royal Collection remains distinct, but large donations such as the Old Royal Library were made from it to the British Museum, established in 1753.
The Uffizi in Florence opened entirely as a gallery in 1765, though this function had been gradually taking the building over from the original civil servants' offices for a long time before.
The building now occupied by the Prado in Madrid was built before the French Revolution for the public display of parts of the royal art collection, and similar royal galleries open to the public existed in Vienna, Munich and other capitals.
The opening of the Musée du Louvre during the French Revolution (in 1793) as a public museum for much of the former French royal collection certainly marked an important stage in the development of public access to art, transferring ownership to a republican state, but was a continuation of trends already well established.
Most modern public museums and art education programs for children in schools can be traced back to this impulse to have art available to everyone.
However, museums do not only provide availability to art, but do also influence the way art is being perceived by the audience, as studies found.
Thus, the museum itself is not only a blunt stage for the presentation of art, but plays an active and vital role in the overall perception of art in modern society.
Museums in the United States tend to be gifts from the very rich to the masses.
There have been attempts by artists to create art that can not be bought by the wealthy as a status object.
One of the prime original motivators of much of the art of the late 1960s and 1970s was to create art that could not be bought and sold.
It is "necessary to present something more than mere objects" said the major post war German artist Joseph Beuys.
This time period saw the rise of such things as performance art, video art, and conceptual art.
The idea was that if the artwork was a performance that would leave nothing behind, or was an idea, it could not be bought and sold.
Artists broadly identified under the heading of Conceptual art .
In the decades since, these ideas have been somewhat lost as the art market has learned to sell limited edition DVDs of video works, invitations to exclusive performance art pieces, and the objects left over from conceptual pieces.
Many of these performances create works that are only understood by the elite who have been educated as to why an idea or video or piece of apparent garbage may be considered art.
The marker of status becomes understanding the work instead of necessarily owning it, and the artwork remains an upper-class activity.
Art has long been controversial, that is to say disliked by some viewers, for a wide variety of reasons, though most pre-modern controversies are dimly recorded, or completely lost to a modern view.
Iconoclasm is the destruction of art that is disliked for a variety of reasons, including religious ones.
Aniconism is a general dislike of either all figurative images, or often just religious ones, and has been a thread in many major religions.
It has been a crucial factor in the history of Islamic art, where depictions of Muhammad remain especially controversial.
Much art has been disliked purely because it depicted or otherwise stood for unpopular rulers, parties or other groups.
Artistic conventions have often been conservative and taken very seriously by art critics, though often much less so by a wider public.
The iconographic content of art could cause controversy, as with late medieval depictions of the new motif of the Swoon of the Virgin in scenes of the Crucifixion of Jesus.
The Last Judgment by Michelangelo was controversial for various reasons, including breaches of decorum through nudity and the Apollo-like pose of Christ.
The content of much formal art through history was dictated by the patron or commissioner rather than just the artist, but with the advent of Romanticism, and economic changes in the production of art, the artists' vision became the usual determinant of the content of his art, increasing the incidence of controversies, though often reducing their significance.
Strong incentives for perceived originality and publicity also encouraged artists to court controversy.
Théodore Géricault's Raft of the Medusa (c.
Édouard Manet's Le Déjeuner sur l'Herbe (1863), was considered scandalous not because of the nude woman, but because she is seated next to men fully dressed in the clothing of the time, rather than in robes of the antique world.
John Singer Sargent's Madame Pierre Gautreau (Madam X) (1884), caused a controversy over the reddish pink used to color the woman's ear lobe, considered far too suggestive and supposedly ruining the high-society model's reputation.
The gradual abandonment of naturalism and the depiction of realistic representations of the visual appearance of subjects in the 19th and 20th centuries led to a rolling controversy lasting for over a century.
In the 20th century, Pablo Picasso's Guernica (1937) used arresting cubist techniques and stark monochromatic oils, to depict the harrowing consequences of a contemporary bombing of a small, ancient Basque town.
Leon Golub's Interrogation III (1981), depicts a female nude, hooded detainee strapped to a chair, her legs open to reveal her sexual organs, surrounded by two tormentors dressed in everyday clothing.
Andres Serrano's Piss Christ (1989) is a photograph of a crucifix, sacred to the Christian religion and representing Christ's sacrifice and final suffering, submerged in a glass of the artist's own urine.
The resulting uproar led to comments in the United States Senate about public funding of the arts.
Before Modernism, aesthetics in Western art was greatly concerned with achieving the appropriate balance between different aspects of realism or truth to nature and the ideal; ideas as to what the appropriate balance is have shifted to and fro over the centuries.
This concern is largely absent in other traditions of art.
The aesthetic theorist John Ruskin, who championed what he saw as the naturalism of J.
Turner, saw art's role as the communication by artifice of an essential truth that could only be found in nature.
The definition and evaluation of art has become especially problematic since the 20th century.
Richard Wollheim distinguishes three approaches to assessing the aesthetic value of art: the Realist, whereby aesthetic quality is an absolute value independent of any human view; the Objectivist, whereby it is also an absolute value, but is dependent on general human experience; and the Relativist position, whereby it is not an absolute value, but depends on, and varies with, the human experience of different humans.
The arrival of Modernism in the late 19th century led to a radical break in the conception of the function of art, and then again in the late 20th century with the advent of postmodernism.
Clement Greenberg's 1960 article "Modernist Painting" defines modern art as "the use of characteristic methods of a discipline to criticize the discipline itself".
Realistic, naturalistic art had dissembled the medium, using art to conceal art; modernism used art to call attention to art.
The limitations that constitute the medium of painting—the flat surface, the shape of the support, the properties of the pigment—were treated by the Old Masters as negative factors that could be acknowledged only implicitly or indirectly.
Under Modernism these same limitations came to be regarded as positive factors, and were acknowledged openly.
After Greenberg, several important art theorists emerged, such as Michael Fried, T.
Clark, Rosalind Krauss, Linda Nochlin and Griselda Pollock among others.
Though only originally intended as a way of understanding a specific set of artists, Greenberg's definition of modern art is important to many of the ideas of art within the various art movements of the 20th century and early 21st century.
Pop artists like Andy Warhol became both noteworthy and influential through work including and possibly critiquing popular culture, as well as the art world.
Artists of the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s expanded this technique of self-criticism beyond high art to all cultural image-making, including fashion images, comics, billboards and pornography.
Duchamp once proposed that art is any activity of any kind – everything.
However, the way that only certain activities are classified today as art is a social construction.
There is evidence that there may be an element of truth to this.
In The Invention of Art: A Cultural History, Larry Shiner examines the construction of the modern system of the arts, i.
He finds evidence that the older system of the arts before our modern system (fine art) held art to be any skilled human activity; for example, Ancient Greek society did not possess the term art, but techne.
Techne can be understood neither as art or craft, the reason being that the distinctions of art and craft are historical products that came later on in human history.
Techne included painting, sculpting and music, but also cooking, medicine, horsemanship, geometry, carpentry, prophecy, and farming, etc.
Following Duchamp during the first half of the 20th century, a significant shift to general aesthetic theory took place which attempted to apply aesthetic theory between various forms of art, including the literary arts and the visual arts, to each other.
This resulted in the rise of the New Criticism school and debate concerning the intentional fallacy.
At issue was the question of whether the aesthetic intentions of the artist in creating the work of art, whatever its specific form, should be associated with the criticism and evaluation of the final product of the work of art, or, if the work of art should be evaluated on its own merits independent of the intentions of the artist.
Wimsatt and Monroe Beardsley published a classic and controversial New Critical essay entitled "The Intentional Fallacy", in which they argued strongly against the relevance of an author's intention, or "intended meaning" in the analysis of a literary work.
For Wimsatt and Beardsley, the words on the page were all that mattered; importation of meanings from outside the text was considered irrelevant, and potentially distracting.
In another essay, "The Affective Fallacy", which served as a kind of sister essay to "The Intentional Fallacy" Wimsatt and Beardsley also discounted the reader's personal/emotional reaction to a literary work as a valid means of analyzing a text.
This fallacy would later be repudiated by theorists from the reader-response school of literary theory.
Ironically, one of the leading theorists from this school, Stanley Fish, was himself trained by New Critics.
Fish criticizes Wimsatt and Beardsley in his 1970 essay "Literature in the Reader".
As summarized by Berys Gaut and Paisley Livingston in their essay "The Creation of Art": "Structuralist and post-structuralists theorists and critics were sharply critical of many aspects of New Criticism, beginning with the emphasis on aesthetic appreciation and the so-called autonomy of art, but they reiterated the attack on biographical criticisms' assumption that the artist's activities and experience were a privileged critical topic.
So details of the act of creating a work, though possibly of interest in themselves, have no bearing on the correct interpretation of the work.
Gaut and Livingston define the intentionalists as distinct from formalists stating that: "Intentionalists, unlike formalists, hold that reference to intentions is essential in fixing the correct interpretation of works.
The end of the 20th century fostered an extensive debate known as the linguistic turn controversy, or the "innocent eye debate" in the philosophy of art.
This debate discussed the encounter of the work of art as being determined by the relative extent to which the conceptual encounter with the work of art dominates over the perceptual encounter with the work of art.
Decisive for the linguistic turn debate in art history and the humanities were the works of yet another tradition, namely the structuralism of Ferdinand de Saussure and the ensuing movement of poststructuralism.
In 1981, the artist Mark Tansey created a work of art titled The Innocent Eye as a criticism of the prevailing climate of disagreement in the philosophy of art during the closing decades of the 20th century.
Influential theorists include Judith Butler, Luce Irigaray, Julia Kristeva, Michel Foucault and Jacques Derrida.
The power of language, more specifically of certain rhetorical tropes, in art history and historical discourse was explored by Hayden White.
The fact that language is not a transparent medium of thought had been stressed by a very different form of philosophy of language which originated in the works of Johann Georg Hamann and Wilhelm von Humboldt.
Ernst Gombrich and Nelson Goodman in his book Languages of Art: An Approach to a Theory of Symbols came to hold that the conceptual encounter with the work of art predominated exclusively over the perceptual and visual encounter with the work of art during the 1960s and 1970s.
He was challenged on the basis of research done by the Nobel prize winning psychologist Roger Sperry who maintained that the human visual encounter was not limited to concepts represented in language alone (the linguistic turn) and that other forms of psychological representations of the work of art were equally defensible and demonstrable.
Sperry's view eventually prevailed by the end of the 20th century with aesthetic philosophers such as Nick Zangwill strongly defending a return to moderate aesthetic formalism among other alternatives.
Disputes as to whether or not to classify something as a work of art are referred to as classificatory disputes about art.
Classificatory disputes in the 20th century have included cubist and impressionist paintings, Duchamp's Fountain, the movies, J.
Boggs' superlative imitations of banknotes, conceptual art, and video games.
Philosopher David Novitz has argued that disagreement about the definition of art are rarely the heart of the problem.
Rather, "the passionate concerns and interests that humans vest in their social life" are "so much a part of all classificatory disputes about art.
For example, when the Daily Mail criticized Hirst's and Emin's work by arguing "For 1,000 years art has been one of our great civilising forces.
Today, pickled sheep and soiled beds threaten to make barbarians of us all" they are not advancing a definition or theory about art, but questioning the value of Hirst's and Emin's work.
In 1998, Arthur Danto, suggested a thought experiment showing that "the status of an artifact as work of art results from the ideas a culture applies to it, rather than its inherent physical or perceptible qualities.
Cultural interpretation (an art theory of some kind) is therefore constitutive of an object's arthood.
Anti-art is a label for art that intentionally challenges the established parameters and values of art; it is a term associated with Dadaism and attributed to Marcel Duchamp just before World War I, when he was making art from found objects.
One of these, Fountain (1917), an ordinary urinal, has achieved considerable prominence and influence on art.
Anti-art is a feature of work by Situationist International, the lo-fi Mail art movement, and the Young British Artists, though it is a form still rejected by the Stuckists, who describe themselves as anti-anti-art.
Architecture is often included as one of the visual arts; however, like the decorative arts, or advertising, it involves the creation of objects where the practical considerations of use are essential in a way that they usually are not in a painting, for example.
Somewhat in relation to the above, the word art is also used to apply judgments of value, as in such expressions as "that meal was a work of art" (the cook is an artist), or "the art of deception" (the highly attained level of skill of the deceiver is praised).
It is this use of the word as a measure of high quality and high value that gives the term its flavor of subjectivity.
Making judgments of value requires a basis for criticism.
At the simplest level, a way to determine whether the impact of the object on the senses meets the criteria to be considered art is whether it is perceived to be attractive or repulsive.
Though perception is always colored by experience, and is necessarily subjective, it is commonly understood that what is not somehow aesthetically satisfying cannot be art.
However, "good" art is not always or even regularly aesthetically appealing to a majority of viewers.
In other words, an artist's prime motivation need not be the pursuit of the aesthetic.
Also, art often depicts terrible images made for social, moral, or thought-provoking reasons.
For example, Francisco Goya's painting depicting the Spanish shootings of 3 May 1808 is a graphic depiction of a firing squad executing several pleading civilians.
Yet at the same time, the horrific imagery demonstrates Goya's keen artistic ability in composition and execution and produces fitting social and political outrage.
Thus, the debate continues as to what mode of aesthetic satisfaction, if any, is required to define 'art'.
The assumption of new values or the rebellion against accepted notions of what is aesthetically superior need not occur concurrently with a complete abandonment of the pursuit of what is aesthetically appealing.
Indeed, the reverse is often true, that the revision of what is popularly conceived of as being aesthetically appealing allows for a re-invigoration of aesthetic sensibility, and a new appreciation for the standards of art itself.
Countless schools have proposed their own ways to define quality, yet they all seem to agree in at least one point: once their aesthetic choices are accepted, the value of the work of art is determined by its capacity to transcend the limits of its chosen medium to strike some universal chord by the rarity of the skill of the artist or in its accurate reflection in what is termed the zeitgeist.
Art is often intended to appeal to and connect with human emotion.
It can arouse aesthetic or moral feelings, and can be understood as a way of communicating these feelings.
Artists express something so that their audience is aroused to some extent, but they do not have to do so consciously.
Art may be considered an exploration of the human condition; that is, what it is to be human.
By extension, it has been argued by Emily L.
Spratt that the development of generative artificial intelligence, especially in regard to artificial intelligence art, necessitates a re-evaluation of aesthetic theory in art history today and a reconsideration of the limits of human creativity.
Music and artificial intelligence has taken a similar path.
So too has the use of large language models in generating creative texts.
An essential legal issue are art forgeries, plagiarism, replicas and works that are strongly based on other works of art.
Intellectual property law plays a significant role in the art world.
Copyright protection is granted to artists for their original works, providing them with exclusive rights to reproduce, distribute, and display their creations.
This safeguard empowers artists to govern the usage of their work and safeguard against unauthorized copying or infringement.
The trade in works of art or the export from a country may be subject to legal regulations.
Internationally there are also extensive efforts to protect the works of art created.
The UN, UNESCO and Blue Shield International try to ensure effective protection at the national level and to intervene directly in the event of armed conflicts or disasters.
This can particularly affect museums, archives, art collections and excavation sites.
This should also secure the economic basis of a country, especially because works of art are often of tourist importance.
The founding president of Blue Shield International, Karl von Habsburg, explained an additional connection between the destruction of cultural property and the cause of flight during a mission in Lebanon in April 2019: "Cultural goods are part of the identity of the people who live in a certain place.
If you destroy their culture, you also destroy their identity.
Many people are uprooted, often no longer have any prospects and as a result flee from their homeland.
Katharine Everett Gilbert and Helmut Kuhn, A History of Esthetics.
Indiana: Indiana University Press, 1953.
Catherine de Zegher (ed.
Michael Ann Holly and Keith Moxey (eds.
New Haven: Yale University Press, 2002.
The Invention of Art: A Cultural History.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.
Arthur Danto, The Abuse of Beauty: Aesthetics and the Concept of Art.
Dana Arnold and Margaret Iversen, eds.
London: Blackwell, 2003.
Cole, Ina, From the Sculptor's Studio: Conversations with Twenty Seminal Artists (London: Laurence King Publishing Ltd, 2021) ISBN 9781913947590 OCLC 1420954826.
Antony Briant and Griselda Pollock, eds.
Digital and Other Virtualities: Renegotiating the image.
The New Story of Science: mind and the universe, Lake Bluff, Ill.
Technical Detours: The Early Moholy-Nagy Reconsidered.
Art Gallery of The Graduate Center, The City University of New York and The Salgo Trust for Education, 2006.
Burguete, Maria, and Lam, Lui, eds.
Arts: A Science Matter.
World Scientific: Singapore.
Carol Armstrong and Catherine de Zegher, eds.
Women Artists at the Millennium.
Massachusetts: October Books/The MIT Press, 2006.
Colvin, Sidney (1911).
In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.
Encyclopædia Britannica.
Cambridge University Press.
Carl Jung, Man and His Symbols.
London: Pan Books, 1978.
Gombrich, The Story of Art.
London: Phaidon Press, 1995.
Florian Dombois, Ute Meta Bauer, Claudia Mareis and Michael Schwab, eds.
Intellectual Birdhouse.
Artistic Practice as Research.
London: Koening Books, 2012.
Kristine Stiles and Peter Selz, eds.
Theories and Documents of Contemporary Art.
Kleiner, Gardner, Mamiya and Tansey.
Art Through the Ages, Twelfth Edition (2 volumes) Wadsworth, 2004.
Richard Wollheim, Art and its Objects: An introduction to aesthetics.
New York: Harper & Row, 1968.
What Are You Looking At?
New York: Viking, 2012.
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Fieser, James; Dowden, Bradley (eds.
Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Music is the arrangement of sound to create some combination of form, harmony, melody, rhythm, or otherwise expressive content.
Music is generally agreed to be a cultural universal that is present in all human societies.
Definitions of music vary widely in substance and approach.
While scholars agree that music is defined by a small number of specific elements, there is no consensus as to what these necessary elements are.
Music is often characterized as a highly versatile medium for expressing human creativity.
Diverse activities are involved in the creation of music, and are often divided into categories of composition, improvisation, and performance.
Music may be performed using a wide variety of musical instruments, including the human voice.
It can also be composed, sequenced, or otherwise produced to be indirectly played mechanically or electronically, such as via a music box, barrel organ, or digital audio workstation software on a computer.
Music often plays a key role in social events and religious ceremonies.
The techniques of making music are often transmitted as part of a cultural tradition.
Music is played in public and private contexts, highlighted at events such as festivals and concerts for various different types of ensembles.
Music is used in the production of other media, such as in soundtracks to films, TV shows, operas, and video games.
Listening to music is a common means of entertainment.
The culture surrounding music extends into areas of academic study, journalism, philosophy, psychology, and therapy.
The music industry includes songwriters, performers, sound engineers, producers, tour organizers, distributors of instruments, accessories, and publishers of sheet music and recordings.
Technology facilitating the recording and reproduction of music has historically included sheet music, microphones, phonographs, and tape machines, with playback of digital music being a common use for MP3 players, CD players, and smartphones.
The modern English word music came into use in the 1630s.
It descends from Middle English musike, which in turn descends from Old French musique, then Latin mūsica—and ultimately from Ancient Greek mousiké technē (μουσική τέχνη), a phrase meaning "art of the Muses".
The Muses were nine deities in Ancient Greek mythology who presided over the arts and sciences.
They were included in tales by the earliest Western authors, Homer and Hesiod, and eventually came to be associated with music specifically.
Over time, Polyhymnia would reside over music more prominently than the other muses.
The Latin word musica was also the originator for both the Spanish música and French musique via spelling and linguistic adjustment, though other European terms were probably loanwords, including the Italian musica, German Musik, Dutch muziek, Norwegian musikk, Polish muzyka, and Russian muzïka.
The modern Western world usually defines music as an all-encompassing term used to describe diverse genres, styles, and traditions.
This is not the case worldwide, and languages such as modern Indonesian (musik) and Shona (musakazo) have recently adopted words to reflect this universal conception, as they did not have words that fit exactly the Western scope.
Before Western contact in East Asia, neither Japan nor China had a single word that encompasses music in a broad sense, but culturally, they often regarded music in such a fashion.
The closest word to mean music in Chinese, yue, shares a character with le, meaning joy, and originally referred to all the arts before narrowing in meaning.
Africa is too diverse to make firm generalizations, but the musicologist J.
Kwabena Nketia has emphasized African music's often inseparable connection to dance and speech in general.
Some African cultures, such as the Songye people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Tiv people of Nigeria, have a strong and broad conception of 'music' but no corresponding word in their native languages.
Other words commonly translated as music often have more specific meanings in their respective cultures: the Hindi word for music, sangita, properly refers to art music, while the many Indigenous languages of the Americas have words for music that refer specifically to song but describe instrumental music regardless.
Though the Arabic musiqi can refer to all music, it is usually used for instrumental and metric music, while khandan identifies vocal and improvised music.
It is often debated to what extent the origins of music will ever be understood, and there are competing theories that aim to explain it.
Many scholars highlight a relationship between the origin of music and the origin of language, and there is disagreement surrounding whether music developed before, after, or simultaneously with language.
A similar source of contention surrounds whether music was the intentional result of natural selection or was a byproduct spandrel of evolution.
The earliest influential theory was proposed by Charles Darwin in 1871, who stated that music arose as a form of sexual selection, perhaps via mating calls.
Darwin's original perspective has been heavily criticized for its inconsistencies with other sexual selection methods, though many scholars in the 21st century have developed and promoted the theory.
Other theories include that music arose to assist in organizing labor, improving long-distance communication, benefiting communication with the divine, assisting in community cohesion, or as a defense to scare off predators.
Prehistoric music can only be theorized based on findings from paleolithic archaeology sites.
The disputed Divje Babe flute, a perforated cave bear femur, is at least 40,000 years old, though there is considerable debate surrounding whether it is truly a musical instrument or an object formed by animals.
The earliest objects whose designations as musical instruments are widely accepted are bone flutes from the Swabian Jura, Germany, namely from the Geissenklösterle, Hohle Fels, and Vogelherd caves.
Dated to the Aurignacian (of the Upper Paleolithic) and used by Early European modern humans, from all three caves there are eight examples, four made from the wing bones of birds and four from mammoth ivory; three of these are near complete.
Three flutes from the Geissenklösterle are dated as the oldest, c.
The earliest material and representational evidence of Egyptian musical instruments dates to the Predynastic period, but the evidence is more securely attested in the Old Kingdom when harps, flutes, and double clarinets were played.
Percussion instruments, lyres, and lutes were added to orchestras by the Middle Kingdom.
Cymbals frequently accompanied music and dance, much as they still do in Egypt today.
Egyptian folk music, including the traditional Sufi dhikr rituals, are the closest contemporary music genre to ancient Egyptian music, having preserved many of its features, rhythms and instruments.
The "Hurrian Hymn to Nikkal", found on clay tablets in the ancient Syrian city of Ugarit, is the oldest surviving notated work of music, dating back to approximately 1400 BCE.
Music was an important part of social and cultural life in ancient Greece and was one of the main subjects taught to children.
Musical education was considered important for the development of an individual's soul.
Musicians and singers played a prominent role in Greek theater, and those who received a musical education were seen as nobles and in perfect harmony (as can be read in the Republic, Plato).
Mixed gender choruses performed for entertainment, celebration, and spiritual ceremonies.
Instruments included the double-reed aulos and a plucked string instrument, the lyre, principally a special kind called a kithara.
Music was an important part of education, and boys were taught music starting at age six.
Greek musical literacy created significant musical development.
Greek music theory included the Greek musical modes, which eventually became the basis for Western religious and classical music.
Later, influences from the Roman Empire, Eastern Europe, and the Byzantine Empire changed Greek music.
The Seikilos epitaph is the oldest surviving example of a complete musical composition, including musical notation, from anywhere in the world.
The oldest surviving work written about music theory is Harmonika Stoicheia by Aristoxenus.
Asian music covers a swath of music cultures surveyed in the articles on Arabia, Central Asia, East Asia, South Asia, and Southeast Asia.
These traditions, with several reaching into antiquity, share historical ties through trade, religion and philosophical exchange, yet preserve their unique local aesthetics and performance styles.
Indian classical music is one of the oldest musical traditions in the world.
Sculptures from the Indus Valley civilization show dance and old musical instruments, like the seven-holed flute.
Stringed instruments and drums have been recovered from Harappa and Mohenjo Daro by excavations carried out by Mortimer Wheeler.
The Rigveda, an ancient Hindu text, has elements of present Indian music, with musical notation to denote the meter and mode of chanting.
Indian classical music (marga) is monophonic, and based on a single melody line or raga rhythmically organized through talas.
The poem Cilappatikaram provides information about how new scales can be formed by modal shifting of the tonic from an existing scale.
Present day Hindi music was influenced by Persian traditional music and Afghan Mughals.
Carnatic music, popular in the southern states, is largely devotional; the majority of the songs are addressed to the Hindu deities.
There are songs emphasizing love and other social issues.
Indonesian music has been formed since the Bronze Age culture migrated to the Indonesian archipelago in the 2nd-3rd centuries BCE.
Indonesian traditional music uses percussion instruments, especially kendang and gongs.
Some of them developed elaborate and distinctive instruments, such as the sasando stringed instrument on the island of Rote, the Sundanese angklung, and the complex and sophisticated Javanese and Balinese gamelan orchestras.
Indonesia is the home of gong chime, a general term for a set of small, high pitched pot gongs.
Gongs are usually placed in order of note, with the boss up on a string held in a low wooden frame.
The most popular form of Indonesian music is gamelan, an ensemble of tuned percussion instruments that include metallophones, drums, gongs, and spike fiddles along with bamboo suling (like a flute).
Chinese classical music, the traditional art or court music of China, has a history stretching over about 3,000 years.
It has its own unique systems of musical notation, as well as musical tuning and pitch, musical instruments and styles or genres.
Chinese music is pentatonic-diatonic, having a scale of twelve notes to an octave (5 + 7 = 12) as does European-influenced music.
The medieval music era (500 to 1400), which took place during the Middle Ages, started with the introduction of monophonic (single melodic line) chanting into Catholic Church services.
Musical notation was used since ancient times in Greek culture, but in the Middle Ages, notation was first introduced by the Catholic Church, so chant melodies could be written down, to facilitate the use of the same melodies for religious music across the Catholic empire.
The only European Medieval repertory that has been found, in written form, from before 800 is the monophonic liturgical plainsong chant of the Catholic Church, the central tradition of which was called Gregorian chant.
Alongside these traditions of sacred and church music there existed a vibrant tradition of secular song (non-religious songs).
Examples of composers from this period are Léonin, Pérotin, Guillaume de Machaut, and Walther von der Vogelweide.
Renaissance music (c.
Around 1450, the printing press was invented, which made printed sheet music much less expensive and easier to mass-produce (prior to the invention of the press, all notated music was hand-copied).
The increased availability of sheet music spread musical styles quicker and across a larger area.
Musicians and singers often worked for the church, courts, and towns.
Church choirs grew in size, and the church remained an important patron of music.
By the middle of the 15th century, composers wrote richly polyphonic sacred music, in which different melody lines were interwoven simultaneously.
Prominent composers from this era include Guillaume Du Fay, Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina, Thomas Morley, Orlando di Lasso, and Josquin des Prez.
As musical activity shifted from the church to aristocratic courts, kings, queens and princes competed for the finest composers.
Many leading composers came from the Netherlands, Belgium, and France; they are called the Franco-Flemish composers.
They held important positions throughout Europe, especially in Italy.
Other countries with vibrant musical activity included Germany, England, and Spain.
The Baroque era of music took place from 1600 to 1750, coinciding with the flourishing of the Baroque artistic style in Europe.
The start of the Baroque era was marked by the penning of the first operas.
Polyphonic contrapuntal music (music with separate, simultaneous melodic lines) remained important during this period.
German Baroque composers wrote for small ensembles including strings, brass, and woodwinds, as well as for choirs and keyboard instruments such as pipe organ, harpsichord, and clavichord.
Musical complexity increased during this time.
Several major musical forms were created, some of them which persisted into later periods, seeing further development.
These include the fugue, the invention, the sonata, and the concerto.
The late Baroque style was polyphonically complex and richly ornamented.
Important composers from the Baroque era include Johann Sebastian Bach (Cello suites), George Frideric Handel (Messiah), Georg Philipp Telemann, and Antonio Vivaldi (The Four Seasons).
The music of the Classical period (1730 to 1820) aimed to imitate what were seen as the key elements of the art and philosophy of Ancient Greece and Rome: the ideals of balance, proportion, and disciplined expression.
Music from the Classical period has a lighter, clearer, and considerably simpler texture than the Baroque music which preceded it.
The main style was homophony, where a prominent melody and a subordinate chordal accompaniment part are clearly distinct.
Classical instrumental melodies tended to be almost voicelike and singable.
New genres were developed, and the fortepiano, the forerunner to the modern piano, replaced the Baroque era harpsichord and pipe organ as the main keyboard instrument (though pipe organ continued to be used in sacred music, such as Masses).
Importance was given to instrumental music.
It was dominated by further development of musical forms initially defined in the Baroque period: the sonata, the concerto, and the symphony.
Other main kinds were the trio, string quartet, serenade, and divertimento.
The sonata was the most important and developed form.
Although Baroque composers also wrote sonatas, the Classical style of sonata is completely distinct.
All of the main instrumental forms of the Classical era, from string quartets to symphonies and concertos, were based on the structure of the sonata.
The instruments used chamber music and orchestra became more standardized.
In place of the basso continuo group of the Baroque era, which consisted of harpsichord, organ, or lute along with a number of bass instruments selected at the discretion of the group leader (e.
The practice of improvised chord-playing by the continuo keyboardist or lute player, a hallmark of Baroque music, underwent a gradual decline between 1750 and 1800.
One of the most important changes made in the Classical period was the development of public concerts.
The aristocracy still played a significant role in the sponsorship of concerts and compositions, but it was now possible for composers to survive without being permanent employees of queens or princes.
The increasing popularity of classical music led to a growth in the number and types of orchestras.
The expansion of orchestral concerts necessitated the building of large public performance spaces.
Symphonic music including symphonies, musical accompaniment to ballet, and mixed vocal/instrumental genres, such as opera and oratorio, became more popular.
The best known composers of Classicism are Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach, Christoph Willibald Gluck, Johann Christian Bach, Joseph Haydn, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Ludwig van Beethoven, and Franz Schubert.
Beethoven and Schubert are also considered to be composers in the later part of the Classical era, as it began to move towards Romanticism.
Romanticism was an artistic, literary, and intellectual movement was characterized by its emphasis on emotion and individualism as well as glorification of all the past and nature.
Romantic music expanded beyond the rigid styles and forms of the Classical era into more passionate, dramatic, and expressive pieces and songs.
Romantic composers such as Wagner and Brahms attempted to increase emotional expression and power in their music to describe deeper truths or human feelings.
With symphonic tone poems, composers tried to tell stories and evoke images or landscapes using instrumental music.
Some composers promoted nationalistic pride with patriotic orchestral music inspired by folk music.
The emotional and expressive qualities of music came to take precedence over tradition.
Romantic composers grew in idiosyncrasy, and went further in the syncretism of exploring different art-forms in a musical context, (such as literature), history (historical figures and legends), or nature itself.
Romantic love or longing was a prevalent theme in many works composed during this period.
In some cases, the formal structures from the classical period continued to be used (e.
In many cases, new approaches were explored for existing genres, forms, and functions.
Also, new forms were created that were deemed better suited to the new subject matter.
Composers continued to develop opera and ballet music, exploring new styles and themes.
In the years after 1800, the music developed by Ludwig van Beethoven and Franz Schubert introduced a more dramatic, expressive style.
In Beethoven's case, short motifs, developed organically, came to replace melody as the most significant compositional unit (an example is the distinctive four note figure used in his Fifth Symphony).
Later Romantic composers such as Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, Antonín Dvořák, and Gustav Mahler used more unusual chords and more dissonance to create dramatic tension.
They generated complex and often much longer musical works.
During the late Romantic period, composers explored dramatic chromatic alterations of tonality, such as extended chords and altered chords, which created new sound "colors.
Public concerts became an important part of well-to-do urban society.
It also saw a new diversity in theatre music, including operetta, and musical comedy and other forms of musical theatre.
In the 19th century, a key way new compositions became known to the public was by the sales of sheet music, which middle class amateur music lovers would perform at home, on their piano or other common instruments, such as the violin.
With 20th-century music, the invention of new electric technologies such as radio broadcasting and mass market availability of gramophone records meant sound recordings heard by listeners (on the radio or record player) became the main way to learn about new songs and pieces.
There was a vast increase in music listening as the radio gained popularity and phonographs were used to replay and distribute music; anyone with a radio or record player could hear operas, symphonies, and big bands in their own living room.
During the 19th century, the focus on sheet music had restricted access to new music to middle and upper-class people who could read music and who owned pianos and other instruments.
Radios and record players allowed lower-income people, who could not afford an opera or symphony concert ticket, to hear this music.
As well, people could hear music from different parts of the country, or even different parts of the world, even if they could not afford to travel to these locations.
This helped to spread musical styles.
The focus of art music in the 20th century was characterized by exploration of new rhythms, styles, and sounds.
The horrors of World War I influenced many of the arts, including music, and composers began exploring darker, harsher sounds.
Traditional music styles such as jazz and folk music were used by composers as a source of ideas for classical music.
Igor Stravinsky, Arnold Schoenberg, and John Cage were influential composers in 20th-century art music.
The invention of sound recording and the ability to edit music gave rise to new subgenres of classical music, including the acousmatic and musique concrète schools of electronic composition.
Sound recording was a major influence on the development of popular music genres, because it enabled recordings of songs and bands to be widely distributed.
The introduction of the multitrack recording system had a major influence on rock music, because it could do more than record a band's performance.
Using a multitrack system, a band and their music producer could overdub many layers of instrument tracks and vocals, creating new sounds that would not be possible in a live performance.
Jazz evolved and became an important genre of music over the course of the 20th century, and during the second half, rock music did the same.
Jazz is an American musical artform that originated in the late 19th and early 20th centuries in African American communities in the Southern United States from a confluence of African and European music traditions.
The style's West African pedigree is evident in its use of blue notes, improvisation, polyrhythms, syncopation, and the swung note.
Rock music is a genre of popular music that developed in the 1950s from rock and roll, rockabilly, blues, and country music.
The sound of rock often revolves around the electric or acoustic guitar, and it uses a strong back beat laid down by a rhythm section.
Along with the guitar or keyboards, saxophone and blues-style harmonica are used as soloing instruments.
In its "purest form", it "has three chords, a strong, insistent back beat, and a catchy melody.
Some bands have keyboard instruments such as organ, piano, or, since the 1970s, analog synthesizers.
In the 1980s, pop musicians began using digital synthesizers, such as the DX-7 synthesizer, electronic drum machines such as the TR-808, and synth bass devices (such as the TB-303) or synth bass keyboards.
In the 1990s, an increasingly large range of computerized hardware musical devices and instruments and software (e.
In the 2020s, soft synths and computer music apps make it possible for bedroom producers to create and record types of music, such as electronic dance music, in their home, adding sampled and digital instruments and editing the recording digitally.
In the 1990s, bands in genres such as nu metal began including DJs in their bands.
DJs create music by manipulating recorded music, using a DJ mixer.
In many cultures, including Western classical music, the act of composing also includes the creation of music notation, such as a sheet music "score", which is then performed by the composer or by other singers or musicians.
In popular music and traditional music, the act of composing, which is typically called songwriting, may involve the creation of a basic outline of the song, called the lead sheet, which sets out the melody, lyrics, and chord progression.
In classical music, the composer typically orchestrates their own compositions, but in musical theatre and in pop music, songwriters may hire an arranger to do the orchestration.
In some cases, songwriters may not use notation at all, and instead compose the song in their minds and then play or record it from memory.
In jazz and popular music, notable recordings by influential performers are given the weight that written scores play in classical music.
Even when music is notated relatively precisely, as in classical music, there are many decisions that a performer has to make, because notation does not specify all of the elements of music precisely.
The process of deciding how to perform music that has been previously composed and notated is termed "interpretation".
Different performers' interpretations of the same work of music can vary widely, in terms of the tempos that are chosen and the playing or singing style or phrasing of the melodies.
Composers and songwriters who present their own music are interpreting their songs, just as much as those who perform the music of others.
The standard body of choices and techniques present at a given time and a given place is referred to as performance practice, whereas interpretation is generally used to mean the individual choices of a performer.
Although a musical composition often uses musical notation and has a single author, this is not always the case.
A work of music can have multiple composers, which often occurs in popular music when a band collaborates to write a song, or in musical theatre, when one person writes the melodies, a second person writes the lyrics, and a third person orchestrates the songs.
In some styles of music, such as the blues, a composer/songwriter may create, perform and record new songs or pieces without ever writing them down in music notation.
A piece of music can also be composed with words, images, or computer programs that explain or notate how the singer or musician should create musical sounds.
Examples range from avant-garde music that uses graphic notation, to text compositions such as Aus den sieben Tagen, to computer programs that select sounds for musical pieces.
Music that makes heavy use of randomness and chance is called aleatoric music, and is associated with contemporary composers active in the 20th century, such as John Cage, Morton Feldman, and Witold Lutosławski.
A commonly known example of chance-based music is the sound of wind chimes jingling in a breeze.
The study of composition has traditionally been dominated by examination of methods and practice of Western classical music, but the definition of composition is broad enough to include the creation of popular music and traditional music songs and instrumental pieces as well as spontaneously improvised works like those of free jazz performers and African percussionists such as Ewe drummers.
Performance is the physical expression of music, which occurs when a song is sung or played.
In classical music, a work is written in music notation by a composer and then performed once the composer is satisfied with its structure and instrumentation.
However, as it gets performed, the interpretation of a song or piece can evolve and change.
In classical music, instrumental performers, singers or conductors may gradually make changes to the phrasing or tempo of a piece.
In popular and traditional music, the performers have more freedom to make changes to the form of a song or piece.
As such, in popular and traditional music styles, even when a band plays a cover song, they can make changes such as adding a guitar solo or inserting an introduction.
A performance can either be planned out and rehearsed (practiced)—which is the norm in classical music, jazz big bands, and many popular music styles—or improvised over a chord progression (a sequence of chords), which is the norm in small jazz and blues groups.
Rehearsals of orchestras, concert bands and choirs are led by a conductor.
Rock, blues and jazz bands are usually led by the bandleader.
A rehearsal is a structured repetition of a song or piece by the performers until it can be sung or played correctly and, if it is a song or piece for more than one musician, until the parts are together from a rhythmic and tuning perspective.
Many cultures have strong traditions of solo performance (in which one singer or instrumentalist performs), such as in Indian classical music, and in the Western art-music tradition.
Other cultures, such as in Bali, include strong traditions of group performance.
All cultures include a mixture of both, and performance may range from improvised solo playing to highly planned and organized performances such as the modern classical concert, religious processions, classical music festivals, or music competitions.
Chamber music, which is music for a small ensemble with only one or a few of each type of instrument, is often seen as more intimate than large symphonic works.
Musical improvisation is the creation of spontaneous music, often within (or based on) a pre-existing harmonic framework, chord progression, or riffs.
Improvisers use the notes of the chord, various scales that are associated with each chord, and chromatic ornaments and passing tones which may be neither chord tones nor from the typical scales associated with a chord.
Musical improvisation can be done with or without preparation.
Improvisation is a major part of some types of music, such as blues, jazz, and jazz fusion, in which instrumental performers improvise solos, melody lines, and accompaniment parts.
In the Western art music tradition, improvisation was an important skill during the Baroque era and during the Classical era.
In the Baroque era, performers improvised ornaments, and basso continuo keyboard players improvised chord voicings based on figured bass notation.
As well, the top soloists were expected to be able to improvise pieces such as preludes.
In the Classical era, solo performers and singers improvised virtuoso cadenzas during concerts.
However, in the 20th and early 21st century, as "common practice" Western art music performance became institutionalized in symphony orchestras, opera houses, and ballets, improvisation has played a smaller role, as more and more music was notated in scores and parts for musicians to play.
At the same time, some 20th and 21st century art music composers have increasingly included improvisation in their creative work.
In Indian classical music, improvisation is a core component and an essential criterion of performances.
Music is composed and performed for many purposes, ranging from aesthetic pleasure, religious or ceremonial purposes, or as an entertainment product for the marketplace.
When music was only available through sheet music scores, such as during the Classical and Romantic eras, music lovers would buy the sheet music of their favourite pieces and songs so that they could perform them at home on the piano.
With the advent of the phonograph, records of popular songs, rather than sheet music became the dominant way that music lovers would enjoy their favourite songs.
With the advent of home tape recorders in the 1980s and digital music in the 1990s, music lovers could make tapes or playlists of favourite songs and take them with them on a portable cassette player or MP3 player.
Some music lovers create mix tapes of favourite songs, which serve as a "self-portrait, a gesture of friendship, prescription for an ideal party.
Amateur musicians can compose or perform music for their own pleasure and derive income elsewhere.
Professional musicians are employed by institutions and organisations, including armed forces (in marching bands, concert bands, and popular music groups), religious institutions, symphony orchestras, broadcasting or film production companies, and music schools.
Professional musicians sometimes work as freelancers or session musicians, seeking contracts and engagements in a variety of settings.
There are often many links between amateur and professional musicians.
Beginning amateur musicians take lessons with professional musicians.
In community settings, advanced amateur musicians perform with professional musicians in a variety of ensembles such as community concert bands and community orchestras.
A distinction is often made between music performed for a live audience and music that is performed in a studio so that it can be recorded and distributed through the music retail system or the broadcasting system.
However, there are also many cases where a live performance in front of an audience is also recorded and distributed.
Live concert recordings are popular in both classical music and in popular music forms such as rock, where illegally taped live concerts are prized by music lovers.
In the jam band scene, live, improvised jam sessions are preferred to studio recordings.
Music notation typically means the written expression of music notes and rhythms on paper using symbols.
When music is written down, the pitches and rhythm of the music, such as the notes of a melody, are notated.
Music notation often provides instructions on how to perform the music.
For example, the sheet music for a song may state the song is a "slow blues" or a "fast swing", which indicates the tempo and the genre.
To read notation, a person must have an understanding of music theory, harmony and the performance practice associated with a particular song or piece's genre.
Written notation varies with the style and period of music.
Nowadays, notated music is produced as sheet music or, for individuals with computer scorewriter programs, as an image on a computer screen.
In ancient times, music notation was put onto stone or clay tablets.
To perform music from notation, a singer or instrumentalist requires an understanding of the rhythmic and pitch elements embodied in the symbols and the performance practice that is associated with a piece of music or genre.
In genres requiring musical improvisation, the performer often plays from music where only the chord changes and form of the song are written, requiring the performer to have a great understanding of the music's structure, harmony, and the styles of a particular genre e.
In Western art music, the most common types of written notation are scores, which include all the music parts of an ensemble piece, and parts, which are the music notation for the individual performers or singers.
In popular music, jazz, and blues, the standard musical notation is the lead sheet, which notates the melody, chords, lyrics (if it is a vocal piece), and structure of the music.
Fake books are also used in jazz; they may consist of lead sheets or simply chord charts, which permit rhythm section members to improvise an accompaniment part to jazz songs.
Scores and parts are also used in popular music and jazz, particularly in large ensembles such as jazz "big bands.
Tablature was used in the Baroque era to notate music for the lute, a stringed, fretted instrument.
Many types of music, such as traditional blues and folk music were not written down in sheet music; instead, they were originally preserved in the memory of performers, and the songs were handed down orally, from one musician or singer to another, or aurally, in which a performer learns a song "by ear".
When the composer of a song or piece is no longer known, this music is often classified as "traditional" or as a "folk song".
Different musical traditions have different attitudes towards how and where to make changes to the original source material, from quite strict, to those that demand improvisation or modification to the music.
A culture's history and stories may also be passed on by ear through song.
Music has many different fundamentals or elements.
Depending on the definition of "element" being used, these can include pitch, beat or pulse, tempo, rhythm, melody, harmony, texture, style, allocation of voices, timbre or color, dynamics, expression, articulation, form, and structure.
The elements of music feature prominently in the music curriculums of Australia, the UK, and the US.
All three curriculums identify pitch, dynamics, timbre, and texture as elements, but the other identified elements of music are far from universally agreed upon.
Australia: pitch, timbre, texture, dynamics and expression, rhythm, form, and structure.
UK: pitch, timbre, texture, dynamics, duration, tempo, structure.
USA: pitch, timbre, texture, dynamics, rhythm, form, harmony, style/articulation.
In relation to the UK curriculum, in 2013 the term: "appropriate musical notations" was added to their list of elements and the title of the list was changed from the "elements of music" to the "inter-related dimensions of music".
The inter-related dimensions of music are listed as: pitch, duration, dynamics, tempo, timbre, texture, structure, and appropriate musical notations.
The phrase "the elements of music" is used in a number of different contexts.
The two most common contexts can be differentiated by describing them as the "rudimentary elements of music" and the "perceptual elements of music".
Pitch is an aspect of a sound that we can hear, reflecting whether one musical sound, note, or tone is "higher" or "lower" than another musical sound, note, or tone.
We can talk about the highness or lowness of pitch in the more general sense, such as the way a listener hears a piercingly high piccolo note or whistling tone as higher in pitch than a deep thump of a bass drum.
We also talk about pitch in the precise sense associated with musical melodies, basslines, and chords.
Precise pitch can only be determined in sounds that have a frequency that is clear and stable enough to distinguish from noise.
For example, it is much easier for listeners to discern the pitch of a single note played on a piano than to try to discern the pitch of a crash cymbal that is struck.
A melody, also called a "tune", is a series of pitches (notes) sounding in succession (one after the other), often in a rising and falling pattern.
The notes of a melody are typically created using pitch systems such as scales or modes.
Melodies also often contain notes from the chords used in the song.
The melodies in simple folk songs and traditional songs may use only the notes of a single scale, the scale associated with the tonic note or key of a given song.
For example, a folk song in the key of C (also referred to as C major) may have a melody that uses only the notes of the C major scale (the individual notes C, D, E, F, G, A, B, and C; these are the "white notes" on a piano keyboard.
On the other hand, Bebop-era jazz from the 1940s and contemporary music from the 20th and 21st centuries may use melodies with many chromatic notes (i.
A low musical line played by bass instruments, such as double bass, electric bass, or tuba, is called a bassline.
Harmony refers to the "vertical" sounds of pitches in music, which means pitches that are played or sung together at the same time creates a chord.
Usually, this means the notes are played at the same time, although harmony may also be implied by a melody that outlines a harmonic structure (i.
In music written using the system of major-minor tonality ("keys"), which includes most classical music written from 1600 to 1900 and most Western pop, rock, and traditional music, the key of a piece determines the "home note" or tonic to which the piece generally resolves, and the character (e.
Simple classical pieces and many pop and traditional music songs are written so that all the music is in a single key.
More complex Classical, pop, and traditional music songs and pieces may have two keys (and in some cases three or more keys).
Classical music from the Romantic era (written from about 1820–1900) often contains multiple keys, as does jazz, especially Bebop jazz from the 1940s, in which the key or "home note" of a song may change every four bars or even every two bars.
Rhythm is the arrangement of sounds and silences in time.
Meter animates time in regular pulse groupings, called measures or bars, which in Western classical, popular, and traditional music often group notes in sets of two (e.
Meters are made easier to hear because songs and pieces often (but not always) place an emphasis on the first beat of each grouping.
Notable exceptions exist, such as the backbeat used in much Western pop and rock, in which a song that uses a measure that consists of four beats (called 4/4 time or common time) will have accents on beats two and four, which are typically performed by the drummer on the snare drum, a loud and distinctive-sounding percussion instrument.
In pop and rock, the rhythm parts of a song are played by the rhythm section, which includes chord-playing instruments (e.
Musical texture is the overall sound of a piece of music or song.
The texture of a piece or song is determined by how the melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic materials are combined in a composition, thus determining the overall nature of the sound in a piece.
Texture is often described in regard to the density, or thickness, and range, or width, between lowest and highest pitches, in relative terms as well as more specifically distinguished according to the number of voices, or parts, and the relationship between these voices (see common types below).
For example, a thick texture contains many 'layers' of instruments.
One layer can be a string section or another brass.
The thickness is affected by the amount and the richness of the instruments.
A mother singing a lullaby to her baby would be an example.
Two bluegrass fiddlers playing the same traditional fiddle tune together will typically each vary the melody by some degree and each add different ornaments.
Choral music written in the Renaissance music era was typically written in this style.
A round, which is a song such as "Row, Row, Row Your Boat", which different groups of singers all start to sing at a different time, is an example of polyphony.
Most Western popular music songs from the 19th century onward are written in this texture.
Music that contains a large number of independent parts (e.
Timbre, sometimes called "color" or "tone color" is the quality or sound of a voice or instrument.
Timbre is what makes a particular musical sound different from another, even when they have the same pitch and loudness.
For example, a 440 Hz A note sounds different when it is played on oboe, piano, violin, or electric guitar.
Even if different players of the same instrument play the same note, their notes might sound different due to differences in instrumental technique (e.
Even two instrumentalists playing the same note on the same instrument (one after the other) may sound different due to different ways of playing the instrument (e.
The physical characteristics of sound that determine the perception of timbre include the spectrum, envelope, and overtones of a note or musical sound.
For electric instruments developed in the 20th century, such as electric guitar, electric bass, and electric piano, the performer can also change the tone by adjusting equalizer controls, tone controls on the instrument, and by using electronic effects units such as distortion pedals.
The tone of the electric Hammond organ is controlled by adjusting drawbars.
Expressive qualities are those elements in music that create change in music without changing the main pitches or substantially changing the rhythms of the melody and its accompaniment.
Performers, including singers and instrumentalists, can add musical expression to a song or piece by adding phrasing, by adding effects such as vibrato (with voice and some instruments, such as guitar, violin, brass instruments, and woodwinds), dynamics (the loudness or softness of piece or a section of it), tempo fluctuations (e.
Expression is achieved through the manipulation of pitch (such as inflection, vibrato, slides, etc.
Expression therefore can be seen as a manipulation of all elements to convey "an indication of mood, spirit, character etc.
In music, form describes the overall structure or plan of a song or piece of music, and it describes the layout of a composition as divided into sections.
In the early 20th century, Tin Pan Alley songs and Broadway musical songs were often in AABA thirty-two-bar form, in which the A sections repeated the same eight bar melody (with variation) and the B section provided a contrasting melody or harmony for eight bars.
From the 1960s onward, Western pop and rock songs are often in verse-chorus form, which comprises a sequence of verse and chorus ("refrain") sections, with new lyrics for most verses and repeating lyrics for the choruses.
Popular music often makes use of strophic form, sometimes in conjunction with the twelve bar blues.
In the tenth edition of The Oxford Companion to Music, Percy Scholes defines musical form as "a series of strategies designed to find a successful mean between the opposite extremes of unrelieved repetition and unrelieved alteration.
Scholes states that European classical music had only six stand-alone forms: simple binary, simple ternary, compound binary, rondo, air with variations, and fugue (although musicologist Alfred Mann emphasized that the fugue is primarily a method of composition that has sometimes taken on certain structural conventions.
Where a piece cannot readily be broken into sectional units (though it might borrow some form from a poem, story, or programme), it is said to be through-composed.
Such is often the case with a fantasia, prelude, rhapsody, etude (or study), symphonic poem, Bagatelle, impromptu, or similar composition.
Professor Charles Keil classified forms and formal detail as "sectional, developmental, or variational.
The philosophy of music is the study of fundamental questions regarding music and has connections with questions in metaphysics and aesthetics.
What is the definition of music?
What is the relationship between music and mind?
What does music history reveal to us about the world?
What is the connection between music and emotions?
What is meaning in relation to music?
In ancient times, such as with the Ancient Greeks, the aesthetics of music explored the mathematical and cosmological dimensions of rhythmic and harmonic organization.
In the 18th century, focus shifted to the experience of hearing music, and thus to questions about its beauty and human enjoyment (plaisir and jouissance) of music.
The origin of this philosophic shift is sometimes attributed to Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten in the 18th century, followed by Immanuel Kant.
Through their writing, the ancient term 'aesthetics', meaning sensory perception, received its present-day connotation.
In the 2000s, philosophers have tended to emphasize issues besides beauty and enjoyment.
For example, music's capacity to express emotion has been foregrounded.
In the 20th century, important contributions were made by Peter Kivy, Jerrold Levinson, Roger Scruton, and Stephen Davies.
However, many musicians, music critics, and other non-philosophers have contributed to the aesthetics of music.
In the 19th century, a significant debate arose between Eduard Hanslick, a music critic and musicologist, and composer Richard Wagner regarding whether music can express meaning.
Harry Partch and some other musicologists, such as Kyle Gann, have studied and tried to popularize microtonal music and the usage of alternate musical scales.
Modern composers like La Monte Young, Rhys Chatham, and Glenn Branca paid much attention to a scale called just intonation.
It is often thought that music has the ability to affect our emotions, intellect, and psychology; it can assuage our loneliness or incite our passions.
Plato suggests in The Republic that music has a direct effect on the soul.
Therefore, he proposes that in the ideal regime music would be closely regulated by the state (Book VII).
In Ancient China, Confucius believed that music and rituals or rites are interconnected and harmonious with nature; he stated that music was the harmonization of heaven and earth, while the order was brought by the rites order, making them extremely crucial functions in society.
Modern music psychology aims to explain and understand musical behavior and experience.
Research in this field and its subfields are primarily empirical; their knowledge tends to advance on the basis of interpretations of data collected by systematic observation of and interaction with human participants.
In addition to its focus on fundamental perceptions and cognitive processes, music psychology is a field of research with practical relevance for many areas, including music performance, composition, education, criticism, and therapy, as well as investigations of human aptitude, skill, intelligence, creativity, and social behavior.
Cognitive neuroscience of music is the scientific study of brain-based mechanisms involved in the cognitive processes underlying music.
These behaviours include music listening, performing, composing, reading, writing, and ancillary activities.
It also is increasingly concerned with the brain basis for musical aesthetics and musical emotion.
The field is distinguished by its reliance on direct observations of the brain, using such techniques as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), magnetoencephalography (MEG), electroencephalography (EEG), and positron emission tomography (PET).
Cognitive musicology is a branch of cognitive science concerned with computationally modeling musical knowledge with the goal of understanding both music and cognition.
The use of computer models provides an exacting, interactive medium in which to formulate and test theories and has roots in artificial intelligence and cognitive science.
Cognitive musicology investigates topics such as the parallels between language and music in the brain.
Research often includes biologically inspired models of computation, such as neural networks and evolutionary programs.
This field seeks to model how musical knowledge is represented, stored, perceived, performed, and generated.
By using a well-structured computer environment, the systematic structures of these cognitive phenomena can be investigated.
Psychoacoustics is the scientific study of sound perception.
More specifically, it is the branch of science studying the psychological and physiological responses associated with sound (including speech and music).
It can be further categorized as a branch of psychophysics.
Evolutionary musicology concerns the "origins of music, the question of animal song, selection pressures underlying music evolution", and "music evolution and human evolution".
It seeks to understand music perception and activity in the context of evolutionary theory.
Charles Darwin speculated that music may have held an adaptive advantage and functioned as a protolanguage, a view which has spawned several competing theories of music evolution.
An alternate view sees music as a by-product of linguistic evolution; a type of "auditory cheesecake" that pleases the senses without providing any adaptive function.
This view has been directly countered by numerous music researchers.
An individual's culture or ethnicity plays a role in their music cognition, including their preferences, emotional reaction, and musical memory.
Musical preferences are biased toward culturally familiar musical traditions beginning in infancy, and adults' classification of the emotion of a musical piece depends on both culturally specific and universal structural features.
Additionally, individuals' musical memory abilities are greater for culturally familiar music than for culturally unfamiliar music.
Since the emergence of the study of psychoacoustics in the 1930s, most lists of elements of music have related more to how we hear music than how we learn to play it or study it.
Seashore, in his book Psychology of Music, identified four "psychological attributes of sound".
These were: "pitch, loudness, time, and timbre" (p.
He did not call them the "elements of music" but referred to them as "elemental components" (p.
Nonetheless, these elemental components link precisely with four of the most common musical elements: "Pitch" and "timbre" match exactly, "loudness" links with dynamics, and "time" links with the time-based elements of rhythm, duration, and tempo.
This usage of the phrase "the elements of music" links more closely with Webster's New 20th Century Dictionary definition of an element as: "a substance which cannot be divided into a simpler form by known methods" and educational institutions' lists of elements generally align with this definition as well.
Although writers of lists of "rudimentary elements of music" can vary their lists depending on their personal (or institutional) priorities, the perceptual elements of music should consist of an established (or proven) list of discrete elements which can be independently manipulated to achieve an intended musical effect.
It seems at this stage that there is still research to be done in this area.
A slightly different way of approaching the identification of the elements of music, is to identify the "elements of sound" as: pitch, duration, loudness, timbre, sonic texture, and spatial location, and then to define the "elements of music" as: sound, structure, and artistic intent.
Ethnographic studies demonstrate that music is a participatory, community-based activity.
Music is experienced by individuals in a range of social settings from being alone, to attending a large concert, forming a music community, which cannot be understood as a function of individual will or accident; it includes both commercial and non-commercial participants with a shared set of common values.
Musical performances take different forms in different cultures and socioeconomic milieus.
In Europe and North America, there was a divide between what types of music were viewed as "high culture" and "low culture".
Other types of music—including jazz, blues, soul, and country—are often performed in bars, nightclubs, and theatres, where the audience may drink, dance, and cheer.
Until the 20th century, the division between "high" and "low" musical forms was accepted as a valid distinction that separated out "art music" from popular music heard in bars and dance halls.
Musicologists, such as David Brackett, note a "redrawing of high-low cultural-aesthetic boundaries" in the 20th century.
And, "when industry and public discourses link categories of music with categories of people, they tend to conflate stereotypes with actual listening communities.
When composers introduce styles of music that break with convention, there can be strong resistance from academics and others.
Late-period Beethoven string quartets, Stravinsky ballet scores, serialism, bebop, hip hop, punk rock, and electronica were controversial and criticised, when they were first introduced.
Such themes are examined in the sociology of music, sometimes called sociomusicology, which is pursued in departments of sociology, media studies, or music, and is closely related to ethnomusicology.
Women have played a major role in music throughout history, as composers, songwriters, instrumental performers, singers, conductors, music scholars, music educators, music critics/music journalists, and other musical professions.
In the 2010s, while women comprised a significant proportion of popular music and classical music singers, and a significant proportion of songwriters (many of them being singer-songwriters), there were few women record producers, rock critics, and rock instrumentalists.
Although there have been a huge number of women composers in classical music, from the medieval period to the present day, women composers have been significantly underrepresented in the commonly performed classical music repertoire, music history textbooks, and music encyclopedias; for example, in the Concise Oxford History of Music, Clara Schumann is one of the few female composers who is mentioned.
Women comprise a significant proportion of instrumental soloists in classical music and the percentage of women in orchestras is increasing.
A 2015 article on concerto soloists in major Canadian orchestras, however, indicated that 84% of the soloists with the Montreal Symphony Orchestra were men.
In 2012, women still made up just 6% of the top-ranked Vienna Philharmonic orchestra.
Women are less common as instrumental players in popular music genres such as rock and heavy metal, although there have been a number of notable female instrumentalists and all-female bands.
Women are particularly underrepresented in extreme metal genres.
In the 1960s pop-music scene, "[l]ike most aspects of the.
Though there were plenty of female singers on the radio, women .
Singing was sometimes an acceptable pastime for a girl, but playing an instrument, writing songs, or producing records simply wasn't done.
Women are also underrepresented in orchestral conducting, music criticism/music journalism, music producing, and sound engineering.
While women were discouraged from composing in the 19th century, and there are few women musicologists, women became involved in music education ".
According to Jessica Duchen, a music writer for London's The Independent, women musicians in classical music are ".
In popular music, while there are many women singers recording songs, there are very few women behind the audio console acting as music producers, the individuals who direct and manage the recording process.
One of the most recorded artists is Asha Bhosle, an Indian singer best known as a playback singer in Hindi cinema.
Since the 20th century, live music can be broadcast over the radio, television, or the Internet, or recorded and listened to on a CD player or MP3 player.
In the early 20th century (in the late 1920s), as talking pictures emerged in the early 20th century, with their prerecorded musical tracks, an increasing number of moviehouse orchestra musicians found themselves out of work.
During the 1920s, live musical performances by orchestras, pianists, and theater organists were common at first-run theaters.
With the coming of the talking motion pictures, those featured performances were largely eliminated.
The American Federation of Musicians (AFM) took out newspaper advertisements protesting the replacement of live musicians with mechanical playing devices.
Sometimes, live performances incorporate prerecorded sounds.
For example, a disc jockey uses disc records for scratching, and some 20th-century works have a solo for an instrument or voice that is performed along with music that is prerecorded onto a tape.
Some pop bands use recorded backing tracks.
Computers and many keyboards can be programmed to produce and play Musical Instrument Digital Interface (MIDI) music.
Audiences can also become performers by participating in karaoke, an activity of Japanese origin centered on a device that plays voice-eliminated versions of well-known songs.
Most karaoke machines also have video screens that show lyrics to songs being performed; performers can follow the lyrics as they sing over the instrumental tracks.
The advent of the Internet and widespread high-speed broadband access has transformed the experience of music, partly through the increased ease of access to recordings of music via streaming video and vastly increased choice of music for consumers.
Another effect of the Internet arose with online communities and social media websites like YouTube and Facebook, a social networking service.
These sites make it easier for aspiring singers and amateur bands to distribute videos of their songs, connect with other musicians, and gain audience interest.
Professional musicians also use YouTube as a free publisher of promotional material.
YouTube users, for example, no longer only download and listen to MP3s, but also actively create their own.
According to Don Tapscott and Anthony D.
Williams, in their book Wikinomics, there has been a shift from a traditional consumer role to what they call a "prosumer" role, a consumer who both creates content and consumes.
Manifestations of this in music include the production of mashes, remixes, and music videos by fans.
Music streaming services have further transformed music production.
Streaming platforms, such as Spotify and Apple Music, mediate how music is consumed and distributed.
This raises questions about how artists market their releases (i.
Generative AI systems, more commonly known as Music Metacreation in music generation, are increasingly being used to create music.
A more neutral term is 'Music Generation Systems' (MGSs).
The incorporation of music into general education from preschool to post secondary education is common in North America and Europe.
Involvement in playing and singing music is thought to teach basic skills such as concentration, counting, listening, and cooperation while also promoting understanding of language, improving the ability to recall information, and creating an environment more conducive to learning in other areas.
In elementary schools, children often learn to play instruments such as the recorder, sing in small choirs, and learn about the history of Western art music and traditional music.
Some elementary school children also learn about popular music styles.
In religious schools, children sing hymns and other religious music.
In secondary schools (but rarely in primary schools), students may have the opportunity to perform in some types of musical ensembles, such as choirs (a group of singers), marching bands, concert bands, jazz bands, or orchestras.
In some school systems, music lessons on how to play instruments may be provided.
Some students also take private music lessons after school with a singing teacher or instrument teacher.
Amateur musicians typically learn basic musical rudiments (e.
At the university level, students in most arts and humanities programs can receive credit for taking a few music courses, which typically take the form of an overview course on the history of music, or a music appreciation course that focuses on listening to music and learning about different musical styles.
In addition, most North American and European universities have some types of musical ensembles that students in arts and humanities are able to participate in, such as choirs, marching bands, concert bands, or orchestras.
The study of Western art music is increasingly common outside of North America and Europe, such as the Indonesian Institute of the Arts in Yogyakarta, Indonesia, or the classical music programs that are available in Asian countries such as South Korea, Japan, and China.
At the same time, Western universities and colleges are widening their curriculum to include music of non-Western cultures, such as the music of Africa or Bali (e.
People aiming to become professional musicians, singers, composers, songwriters, music teachers, and practitioners of other music-related professions such as music history professors, sound engineers, and so on study in specialized post-secondary programs offered by colleges, universities, and music conservatories.
Some institutions that train individuals for careers in music offer training in a wide range of professions, as is the case with many of the top U.
On the other hand, some small colleges may only offer training in a single profession (e.
While most university and conservatory music programs focus on training students in classical music, there are universities and colleges that train musicians for careers as jazz or popular music musicians and composers, with notable U.
Two schools in Canada which offer professional jazz training are McGill University and Humber College.
Individuals aiming at careers in some types of music, such as heavy metal music, country music, or blues are unlikely to become professionals by completing degrees or diplomas.
Instead, they typically learn about their style of music by singing or playing in bands (often beginning in amateur bands, cover bands, and tribute bands), studying recordings on DVD and the Internet, and working with already-established professionals in their style of music, either through informal mentoring or regular music lessons.
Since the 2000s, the increasing popularity and availability of Internet forums and YouTube "how-to" videos have enabled singers and musicians from metal, blues, and similar genres to improve their skills.
Many pop, rock, and country singers train informally with vocal coaches and voice teachers.
Musicology, the academic study of music, is studied in universities and music conservatories.
The earliest definitions from the 19th century defined three sub-disciplines of musicology: systematic musicology, historical musicology, and comparative musicology or ethnomusicology.
In 2010-era scholarship, one is more likely to encounter a division into music theory, music history, and ethnomusicology.
Research in musicology has often been enriched by cross-disciplinary work, for example in the field of psychoacoustics.
The study of music of non-Western cultures, and cultural study of music, is called ethnomusicology.
Students can pursue study of musicology, ethnomusicology, music history, and music theory through different types of degrees, including bachelor's, master's and PhD.
Music theory is the study of music, generally in a highly technical manner outside of other disciplines.
More broadly it refers to any study of music, usually related in some form with compositional concerns, and may include mathematics, physics, and anthropology.
What is most commonly taught in beginning music theory classes are guidelines to write in the style of the common practice period, or tonal music.
Theory, even of music of the common practice period, may take other forms.
Musical set theory is the application of mathematical set theory to music, first applied to atonal music.
Speculative music theory, contrasted with analytic music theory, is devoted to the analysis and synthesis of music materials, for example tuning systems, generally as preparation for composition.
Zoomusicology is the study of the music of non-human animals, or the musical aspects of sounds produced by non-human animals.
As George Herzog (1941) asked, "do animals have music?
Jean-Jacques Nattiez (1990), argues that "in the last analysis, it is a human being who decides what is and is not musical, even when the sound is not of human origin.
If we acknowledge that sound is not organised and conceptualised (that is, made to form music) merely by its producer, but by the mind that perceives it, then music is uniquely human.
In the West, much of the history of music that is taught deals with the Western civilization's art music, known as classical music.
The history of music in non-Western cultures ("world music" or the field of "ethnomusicology") is also taught in Western universities.
This includes the documented classical traditions of Asian countries outside the influence of Western Europe, as well as the folk or indigenous music of various other cultures.
Popular or folk styles of music in non-Western countries varied from culture to culture, and period to period.
Different cultures emphasised different instruments, techniques, singing styles and uses for music.
Music has been used for entertainment, ceremonies, rituals, religious purposes, and for practical and artistic communication.
Non-Western music has also been used for propaganda purposes, as was the case with Chinese opera during the Cultural Revolution.
There is a host of music classifications for non-Western music, many of which are caught up in the argument over the definition of music.
Among the largest of these is the division between classical music (or "art" music), and popular music (or commercial music – including non-Western styles of rock, country, and pop music-related styles).
Some genres do not fit neatly into one of these "big two" classifications, (such as folk music, world music, or jazz-related music).
As world cultures have come into greater global contact, their indigenous musical styles have often merged with other styles, which produces new styles.
For example, the United States bluegrass style contains elements from Anglo-Irish, Scottish, Irish, German, and African instrumental and vocal traditions, which were able to fuse in the United States' multi-ethnic "melting pot" society.
Some types of world music contain a mixture of non-Western indigenous styles with Western pop music elements.
Genres of music are determined as much by tradition and presentation as by the actual music.
Some works, like George Gershwin's Rhapsody in Blue, are claimed by both jazz and classical music, while Gershwin's Porgy and Bess and Leonard Bernstein's West Side Story are claimed by both opera and the Broadway musical tradition.
Many music festivals for non-Western music include bands and singers from a particular musical genre, such as world music.
Indian music, for example, is one of the oldest and longest living types of music, and is still widely heard and performed in South Asia, as well as internationally (especially since the 1960s).
Indian music has mainly three forms of classical music, Hindustani, Carnatic, and Dhrupad styles.
It has also a large repertoire of styles, which involve only percussion music such as the talavadya performances famous in South India.
Music therapy is an interpersonal process in which a trained therapist uses music and all of its facets—physical, emotional, mental, social, aesthetic, and spiritual—to help clients to improve or maintain their health.
In some instances, the client's needs are addressed directly through music; in others they are addressed through the relationships that develop between the client and therapist.
Music therapy is used with individuals of all ages and with a variety of conditions, including: psychiatric disorders, medical problems, physical disabilities, sensory impairments, developmental disabilities, substance abuse issues, communication disorders, interpersonal problems, and aging.
It is also used to improve learning, build self-esteem, reduce stress, support physical exercise, and facilitate a host of other health-related activities.
Music therapists may encourage clients to sing, play instruments, create songs, or do other musical activities.
In the 10th century, the philosopher Al-Farabi described how vocal music can stimulate the feelings and souls of listeners.
Music has long been used to help people deal with their emotions.
In the 17th century, the scholar Robert Burton's The Anatomy of Melancholy argued that music and dance were critical in treating mental illness, especially melancholia.
He noted that music has an "excellent power .
In November 2006, Michael J.
Crawford and his colleagues also found that music therapy helped schizophrenic patients.
Grove Music Online — online version of The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians.
Dolmetsch free online music dictionary, complete, with references to a list of specialised music dictionaries (by continent, by instrument, by genre, etc.
Architecture is the study and practice of designing structures, especially habitable ones.
It utilizes civil engineering techniques, but is considered a visual art.
It is both the process and the product of sketching, conceiving, planning, designing, and constructing buildings or other structures.
The term comes from Latin architectura; from Ancient Greek ἀρχιτέκτων (arkhitéktōn) 'architect'; from ἀρχι- (arkhi-) 'chief' and τέκτων (téktōn) 'creator'.
Architectural works, in the material form of buildings, are often perceived as cultural symbols and as works of art.
Historical civilizations are often identified with their surviving architectural achievements.
The practice of architecture itself, which began in the prehistoric era, has been used as a way of expressing culture by civilizations on all seven continents.
For this reason, architecture is considered to be a form of art.
Texts on architecture have been written since ancient times.
The earliest surviving text on architectural theories is the 1st century BC treatise De architectura by the Roman architect Vitruvius, according to whom a good building embodies firmitas, utilitas, and venustas (durability, utility, and beauty).
Centuries later, Leon Battista Alberti developed his ideas further, seeing beauty as an objective quality of buildings to be found in their proportions.
In the 19th century, Louis Sullivan declared that "form follows function".
The idea of sustainable architecture was introduced in the late 20th century.
Architecture began as rural, oral vernacular architecture that developed from trial and error to successful replication.
Ancient urban architecture was preoccupied with building religious structures and buildings symbolizing the political power of rulers until Greek and Roman architecture shifted focus to civic virtues.
Indian and Chinese architecture influenced forms all over Asia and Buddhist architecture in particular took diverse local flavors.
During the Middle Ages, pan-European styles of Romanesque and Gothic cathedrals and abbeys emerged while the Renaissance favored Classical forms implemented by architects known by name.
Later, the roles of architects and engineers became separated.
Modern architecture began after World War I as an avant-garde movement that sought to develop a completely new style appropriate for a new post-war social and economic order focused on meeting the needs of the middle and working classes.
Emphasis was put on modern techniques, materials, and simplified geometric forms, paving the way for high-rise superstructures.
Many architects became disillusioned with modernism which they perceived as ahistorical and anti-aesthetic, and postmodern and contemporary architecture developed.
Over the years, the field of architectural construction has branched out to include everything from ship design to interior decorating.
A general term to describe buildings and other physical structures.
The art and science of designing buildings and (some) nonbuilding structures; sometimes called "architectonics.
The style of design and method of construction of buildings and other physical structures.
A unifying or coherent form or structure.
The knowledge of art, science, technology, and humanity.
The design activity of the architect, from the macro-level (urban design, landscape architecture) to the micro-level (construction details and furniture).
The practice of the architect where architecture means offering or rendering professional services in connection with the design and construction of buildings or built environments.
The philosophy of architecture is a branch of the philosophy of art, dealing with aesthetic value of architecture, its semantics and its relation to the development of culture.
Many philosophers and theoreticians from Plato to Michel Foucault, Gilles Deleuze, Robert Venturi and Ludwig Wittgenstein have concerned themselves with the nature of architecture and whether or not architecture is distinguished from building.
The earliest surviving written work on the subject of architecture is De architectura by the Roman architect Vitruvius in the early 1st century BC.
According to Vitruvius, a good building should satisfy the three principles of firmitas, utilitas, venustas, commonly known by the original translation – firmness, commodity and delight.
According to Vitruvius, the architect should strive to fulfill each of these three attributes as well as possible.
Leon Battista Alberti, who elaborates on the ideas of Vitruvius in his treatise, De re aedificatoria, saw beauty primarily as a matter of proportion, although ornament also played a part.
For Alberti, the rules of proportion were those that governed the idealized human figure, the golden mean.
The most important aspect of beauty was, therefore, an inherent part of an object, rather than something applied superficially, and was based on universal, recognizable truths.
The notion of style in the arts was not developed until the 16th century, with the writing of Giorgio Vasari.
By the 18th century, his Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects had been translated into Italian, French, Spanish, and English.
In the 16th century, Italian Mannerist architect, painter and theorist Sebastiano Serlio wrote Tutte L'Opere D'Architettura et Prospetiva (Complete Works on Architecture and Perspective).
This treatise exerted immense influence throughout Europe, being the first handbook that emphasized the practical rather than the theoretical aspects of architecture, and it was the first to catalog the five orders.
In the early 19th century, Augustus Welby Northmore Pugin wrote Contrasts (1836) that, as the title suggested, contrasted the modern, industrial world, which he disparaged, with an idealized image of neo-medieval world.
Gothic architecture, Pugin believed, was the only "true Christian form of architecture.
Architecture was the "art which so disposes and adorns the edifices raised by men .
For Ruskin, the aesthetic was of overriding significance.
His work goes on to state that a building is not truly a work of architecture unless it is in some way "adorned".
For Ruskin, a well-constructed, well-proportioned, functional building needed string courses or rustication, at the very least.
On the difference between the ideals of architecture and mere construction, the 20th-century architect Le Corbusier wrote: "You employ stone, wood, and concrete, and with these materials you build houses and palaces: that is construction.
Ingenuity is at work.
But suddenly you touch my heart, you do me good.
I am happy and I say: This is beautiful.
That is Architecture".
Le Corbusier's contemporary Ludwig Mies van der Rohe is said to have stated in a 1959 interview that "architecture starts when you carefully put two bricks together.
The notable 19th-century architect of skyscrapers, Louis Sullivan, promoted an overriding precept to architectural design: "Form follows function".
While the notion that structural and aesthetic considerations should be entirely subject to functionality was met with both popularity and skepticism, it introduced the concept of "function" in place of Vitruvius' "utility".
Nunzia Rondanini stated, "Through its aesthetic dimension architecture goes beyond the functional aspects that it has in common with other human sciences.
Through its own particular way of expressing values, architecture can stimulate and influence social life without presuming that, in and of itself, it will promote social development.
To restrict the meaning of (architectural) formalism to art for art's sake is not only reactionary; it can also be a purposeless quest for perfection or originality which degrades form into a mere instrumentality".
The aesthetics of architecture remain a contested topic.
Differences in aesthetic preferences between architects and the public were found.
Studies generally find that there is a strong public preference for traditional and classical architectural styles over modernist designs.
James Stevens Curl argues that modernist architects often favour designs that are alienating and environmentally damaging.
Léon Krier frames the dominance of traditional styles in private architecture as an "overwhelming democratic reality," contrasting with the prevalence of modernist designs in public commissions.
Among the philosophies that have influenced modern architects and their approach to building design are Rationalism, Empiricism, Structuralism, Poststructuralism, Deconstruction and Phenomenology.
In the late 20th century a new concept was added to those included in the compass of both structure and function, the consideration of sustainability, hence sustainable architecture.
To satisfy the contemporary ethos, a building should be constructed in a manner which is environmentally friendly in terms of the production of its materials, its impact upon the natural and built environment of its surrounding area and the demands that it makes upon the natural environment for heating, ventilation and cooling, water use, waste products and lighting.
Building first evolved out of the dynamics between needs (e.
As human cultures developed and knowledge began to be formalized through oral traditions and practices, building became a craft, and architecture became the term used to describe the highly formalized and respected aspects of the craft.
It is widely assumed that architectural success was achieved through trial and error, with progressively less trial and more replication as results became satisfactory over time.
However, vernacular architecture, in essence a rudimentary, non-academic form of building construction based on cultural traditions, continues to be produced in many parts of the world.
Early human settlements were mostly rural.
Expanding economies resulted in the creation of proto-cities or urban areas, which in some cases grew and evolved very rapidly, such as Çatalhöyük in modern-day Turkey and Mohenjo-daro in modern-day Pakistan.
Neolithic archaeological sites include Göbekli Tepe and Çatalhöyük in Turkey, Jericho in the Levant, Mehrgarh in Pakistan, Skara Brae in Orkney, and Cucuteni-Trypillian culture settlements in Romania, Moldova and Ukraine.
In many ancient civilizations, such as those of Egypt and Mesopotamia, architecture and urbanism reflected the constant engagement with the divine and the supernatural, and many ancient cultures resorted to monumentality in their architecture to symbolically represent the political power of the ruler or the state itself.
In Egypt, the education of state architects was closely linked to the priestly class, and trade secrets were passed from father to son.
Plans were drawn and then implemented using the ruler, square, and triangle.
The architecture and urbanism of classical civilizations such as the Greek and Roman civilizations evolved from civic ideals rather than religious or empirical ones.
New building types emerged and architectural style developed in the form of the classical orders.
Roman architecture was influenced by Greek architecture as they incorporated many Greek elements into their building practices.
Texts on architecture have been written since ancient times—these texts provided both general advice and specific formal prescriptions or canons.
Some examples of canons are found in the writings of Vitruvius in the 1st century BC.
Some of the most important early examples of canonic architecture are religious.
Asian architecture developed differently from European architecture, and the Buddhist, Hindu and Sikh architectural styles have different characteristics.
Unlike Indian and Chinese architecture, which had great influence on the surrounding regions, Japanese architecture did not.
Some Asian architecture showed great regional diversity, in particular Buddhist architecture.
Moreover, another architectural achievement in Asia is the Hindu temple architecture, which developed from around the 5th century CE.
It is, in theory, governed by concepts laid down in the Shastras, and is concerned with expressing both the macrocosm and the microcosm.
In many Asian countries, pantheistic religion led to architectural forms that were designed specifically to enhance the natural landscape.
Also, the grandest houses were relatively lightweight structures mainly using wood until recent times, and there are few survivals of great age.
Buddhism was associated with a move to stone and brick religious structures, probably beginning as rock-cut architecture, which has often survived very well.
Early Asian writings on architecture include the Kao Gong Ji of China from the 7th–5th centuries BC, the Shilpa Shastras of ancient India, Manjusri Vasthu Vidya Sastra of Sri Lanka, and Araniko of Nepal.
The Architecture of Africa is very diverse, reflecting the continent’s many climates, cultures, and histories.
Traditional African architecture mixes building traditions, using a wide arrange of materials like mud, stone, and wood.
Fractal scaling is commonly used in designs, making smaller parts of a structure mirror the overall design.
This concept can be seen in village layouts and decorative elements.
Historical stone structures like the great Zimbabwe walls show the long lasting and durable construction.
Wattle and Daub is a technique used in many areas that take wooden frames covered in mud to create rounded structures that help to regulate the temperature inside.
Architecture in West Africa such as Porto-Novo in Benin, Lagos Island and Zaria in Nigeria and Dakar in Senegal is dominated by the Sudano-Sahelian, Afro-modernist designs and Sobrado styles.
This is a form of multi-storied, Portuguese-Brazilian baroque architecture.
These buildings are suited for dry, hot climates, as they often have central or rear courtyard, stuccoed façades, symmetrical layouts, tiled roofs for heat insulation, and prominent balconies.
Along the Swahili Coast of East Africa many homes are made out of coral stone with mangrove pole roofs.
The architecture is a mix of local, Arabic and Islamic styles due to trade across the Indian Ocean.
Ethiopia also has stunning architectural traditions like the rock-hewn churches like the 13th century churches of Lalibela which were carved directly into the ground.
Together, these styles highlight the creativity, adaptability, and cultural depth of African architectural traditions.
Islamic architecture began in the 7th century, incorporating architectural forms from the ancient Middle East and Byzantium, but also developing features to suit the religious and social needs of the society.
Examples can be found throughout the Middle East, Africa, Iberian Peninsula, the Mediterranean islands, the Indian Sub-continent and later in Eastern parts of Europe, such as the Balkan States, as the result of the expansion of the Ottoman Empire.
In Europe during the Medieval period, guilds were formed by craftsmen to organize their trades and written contracts have survived, particularly in relation to ecclesiastical buildings.
The role of architect was usually one with that of master mason, or Magister lathomorum as they are sometimes described in contemporary documents.
The major architectural undertakings were the building of abbeys and cathedrals.
From about 900 onward, the movements of both clerics and tradesmen carried architectural knowledge across Europe, resulting in the pan-European styles Romanesque and Gothic.
A significant part of the Middle Ages architectural heritage is numerous fortifications across the continent.
From the Balkans to Spain, and from Malta to Estonia, these buildings represent an important part of European heritage.
In Renaissance Europe, from about 1400 onwards, there was a revival of Classical learning accompanied by the development of Renaissance humanism, which placed greater emphasis on the role of the individual in society than had been the case during the Medieval period.
Buildings were ascribed to specific architects – Brunelleschi, Alberti, Michelangelo, Palladio – and the cult of the individual had begun.
There was still no dividing line between artist, architect, engineer, or any of the related vocations, and the appellation was often one of regional preference.
A revival of the Classical style in architecture was accompanied by a burgeoning of science and engineering, which affected the proportions and structure of buildings.
At this stage, it was still possible for an artist to design a bridge as the level of structural calculations involved was within the scope of the generalist.
With the emerging knowledge in scientific fields and the rise of new materials and technology, architecture and engineering began to separate, and the architect began to concentrate on aesthetics and the humanist aspects, often at the expense of technical aspects of building design.
There was also the rise of the "gentleman architect" who usually dealt with wealthy clients and concentrated predominantly on visual qualities derived usually from historical prototypes, typified by the many country houses of Great Britain that were created in the Neo Gothic or Scottish baronial styles.
Formal architectural training in the 19th century, for example, at École des Beaux-Arts in France, gave much emphasis to the production of beautiful drawings and little to context and feasibility.
Meanwhile, the Industrial Revolution laid open the door for mass production and consumption.
Aesthetics became a criterion for the middle class as ornamented products, once within the province of expensive craftsmanship, became cheaper under machine production.
Vernacular architecture became increasingly ornamental.
Housebuilders could use current architectural design in their work by combining features found in pattern books and architectural journals.
Around the beginning of the 20th century, general dissatisfaction with the emphasis on revivalist architecture and elaborate decoration gave rise to many new lines of thought that served as precursors to Modern architecture.
Notable among these is the Deutscher Werkbund, formed in 1907 to produce better quality machine-made objects.
The rise of the profession of industrial design is usually placed here.
Following this lead, the Bauhaus school, founded in Weimar, Germany in 1919, redefined the architectural bounds prior set throughout history, viewing the creation of a building as the ultimate synthesis – the apex – of art, craft, and technology.
When modern architecture was first practiced, it was an avant-garde movement with moral, philosophical, and aesthetic underpinnings.
Immediately after World War I, pioneering modernist architects sought to develop a completely new style appropriate for a new post-war social and economic order focused on meeting the needs of the middle and working classes.
They rejected the architectural practice of the academic refinement of historical styles which served the rapidly declining aristocratic order.
The approach of the Modernist architects was to reduce buildings to pure forms, removing historical references and ornament in favor of functional details.
Buildings displayed their functional and structural elements, exposing steel beams and concrete surfaces instead of hiding them behind decorative forms.
Architects such as Frank Lloyd Wright developed organic architecture, in which the form was defined by its environment and purpose, with an aim to promote harmony between human habitation and the natural world with prime examples being Robie House and Fallingwater.
Architects such as Mies van der Rohe, Philip Johnson, and Marcel Breuer worked to create beauty based on the inherent qualities of building materials and modern construction techniques, trading traditional historic forms for simplified geometric forms, celebrating the new means and methods made possible by the Industrial Revolution, including steel-frame construction, which gave birth to high-rise superstructures.
Fazlur Rahman Khan's development of the tube structure was a technological breakthrough in building ever higher.
By mid-century, Modernism had morphed into the International Style, an aesthetic epitomized in many ways by the Twin Towers of New York's World Trade Center designed by Minoru Yamasaki.
Many architects resisted modernism, finding it devoid of the decorative richness of historical styles.
As the first generation of modernists began to die after World War II, the second generation of architects including Paul Rudolph, Marcel Breuer, and Eero Saarinen tried to expand the aesthetics of modernism with Brutalism, buildings with expressive sculpture façades made of unfinished concrete.
But an even younger postwar generation critiqued modernism and Brutalism for being too austere, standardized, monotone, and not taking into account the richness of human experience offered in historical buildings across time and in different places and cultures.
One such reaction to the cold aesthetic of modernism and Brutalism is the school of metaphoric architecture, which includes such things as bio morphism and zoomorphic architecture, both using nature as the primary source of inspiration and design.
While it is considered by some to be merely an aspect of postmodernism, others consider it to be a school in its own right and a later development of expressionist architecture.
Beginning in the late 1950s and 1960s, architectural phenomenology emerged as an important movement in the early reaction against modernism, with architects like Charles Moore in the United States, Christian Norberg-Schulz in Norway, and Ernesto Nathan Rogers, Vittorio Gregotti, Michele Valori, and Bruno Zevi in Italy, who collectively popularized an interest in a new contemporary architecture aimed at expanding human experience using historical buildings as models and precedents.
Postmodernism produced a style that combined contemporary building technology and cheap materials with the aesthetics of older pre-modern and non-modern styles, from high classical architecture to popular or vernacular regional building styles.
Robert Venturi famously defined postmodern architecture as a "decorated shed" (an ordinary building which is functionally designed inside and embellished on the outside) and upheld it against modernist and brutalist "ducks" (buildings with unnecessarily expressive tectonic forms).
Since the 1980s, as the complexity of buildings began to increase (in terms of structural systems, services, energy and technologies), the field of architecture became multi-disciplinary with specializations for each project type, technological expertise or project delivery methods.
Moreover, there has been an increased separation of the 'design' architect from the 'project' architect who ensures that the project meets the required standards and deals with matters of liability.
The preparatory processes for the design of any large building have become increasingly complicated, and require preliminary studies of such matters as durability, sustainability, quality, money, and compliance with local laws.
A large structure can no longer be the design of one person but must be the work of many.
Modernism and Postmodernism have been criticized by some members of the architectural profession who feel that successful architecture is not a personal, philosophical, or aesthetic pursuit by individualists; rather it has to consider everyday needs of people and use technology to create livable environments, with the design process being informed by studies of behavioral, environmental, and social sciences.
Environmental sustainability has become a mainstream issue, with a profound effect on the architectural profession.
Many developers, those who support the financing of buildings, have become educated to encourage the facilitation of environmentally sustainable design, rather than solutions based primarily on immediate cost.
Major examples of this can be found in passive solar building design, greener roof designs, biodegradable materials, and more attention to a structure's energy usage.
This major shift in architecture has also changed architecture schools to focus more on the environment.
There has been an acceleration in the number of buildings that seek to meet green building sustainable design principles.
Sustainable practices that were at the core of vernacular architecture increasingly provide inspiration for environmentally and socially sustainable contemporary techniques.
Green Building Council's LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) rating system has been influential in this.
Concurrently, the recent movements of New Urbanism, Metaphoric architecture, contemporary Traditional architecture and New Classical architecture promote a sustainable approach towards construction that appreciates and develops smart growth, architectural tradition, and classical design.
This in contrast to modernist and globally uniform architecture, as well as leaning against solitary housing estates and suburban sprawl.
Glass curtain walls, which were the hallmark of the ultra modern urban life in many countries, surfaced even in developing countries like Nigeria where international styles had been represented since the mid-20th Century, mostly because of the leanings of foreign-trained architects.
Residential architecture is the design which functionally fits the user's lifestyle while adhering to the building codes and zoning laws.
Commercial architecture is the design of commercial buildings that serves the needs of businesses, the government, and religious institutions.
Industrial architecture is the design of specialized industrial buildings, whose primary focus is designing buildings that can fulfil their function while ensuring the safe movement of labor and goods in the facility.
Landscape architecture is the design of outdoor public areas, landmarks, and structures to achieve environmental, social-behavioral, or aesthetic outcomes.
It involves the systematic investigation of existing social, ecological, and soil conditions and processes in the landscape and the design of interventions that will produce the desired outcome.
The scope of the profession includes landscape design, site planning, stormwater management, environmental restoration, parks and recreation planning, visual resource management, green infrastructure planning and provision, and private estate and residence landscape master planning and design all at varying scales of design, planning, and management.
A practitioner in the profession of landscape architecture is called a landscape architect.
Interior architecture is the design of a space which has been created by structural boundaries and the human interaction within these boundaries.
It can also be the initial design and plan for use, then later redesigned to accommodate a changed purpose or a significantly revised design for adaptive reuse of the building shell.
The latter is often part of sustainable architecture practices, conserving resources through "recycling" a structure by adaptive redesign.
Generally referred to as the spatial art of environmental design, form and practice, interior architecture is the process through which the interiors of buildings are designed, concerned with all aspects of the human uses of structural spaces.
Urban design is the process of designing and shaping the physical features of cities, towns, and villages.
In contrast to architecture, which focuses on the design of individual buildings, urban design deals with the larger scale of groups of buildings, streets and public spaces, whole neighborhoods and districts, and entire cities, with the goal of making urban areas functional, attractive, and sustainable.
Urban design is an interdisciplinary field that uses elements of many built environment professions, including landscape architecture, urban planning, architecture, civil engineering and municipal engineering.
It is common for professionals in all these disciplines to practice urban design.
In more recent times different sub-subfields of urban design have emerged such as strategic urban design, landscape urbanism, water-sensitive urban design, and sustainable urbanism.
Green Building is about the structure and application process of minimizing the environmental impact of buildings.
Interest in sustainable design grew after the 1973 oil embargo which highlighted the need for policies like the Clean Water Act and the creation of the Environmental Protection Agency.
This motivated a small group of architects that were passionate and environmentally conscious to start designing more sustainably.
Green Design uses renewable energy strategies like, green roofs, passive heating/cooling, and reduced materials help to create sustainable and high-performance structures that blend with the nature around them.
Sustainable materials like reclaimed wood, bamboo, and recycled materials are used to limit resource waste.
Water conservation is another key strategy, utilizing systems that make sure to harvest rainwater and recycle greywater.
Architects also orientate buildings to take advantage of the climate utilizing the sun for natural lighting and the wind for ventilation.
Together, these strategies create high performance buildings that work with nature rather than against.
Naval architecture, also known as naval engineering, is an engineering discipline dealing with the engineering design process, shipbuilding, maintenance, and operation of marine vessels and structures.
Naval architecture involves basic and applied research, design, development, design evaluation, and calculations during all stages of the life of a marine vehicle.
Preliminary design of the vessel, its detailed design, construction, trials, operation and maintenance, launching, and dry-docking are the main activities involved.
Ship design calculations are also required for ships being modified (by means of conversion, rebuilding, modernization, or repair).
Naval architecture also involves the formulation of safety regulations and damage control rules and the approval and certification of ship designs to meet statutory and non-statutory requirements.
Computer architecture, a set of rules and methods that describe the functionality, organization, and implementation of computer systems with software architecture, hardware architecture and network architecture covering more specific aspects.
Business architecture, defined as "a blueprint of the enterprise that provides a common understanding of the organization and is used to align strategic objectives and tactical demands.
Cognitive architecture theories about the structure of the human mind.
System architecture, a conceptual model that defines the structure, behavior, and more views of any type of system.
The term 'seismic architecture' or 'earthquake architecture' was first introduced in 1985 by Robert Reitherman.
The phrase "earthquake architecture" is used to describe a degree of architectural expression of earthquake resistance or implication of architectural configuration, form, or style in earthquake resistance.
It is also used to describe buildings in which seismic design considerations impacted its architecture.
It may be considered a new aesthetic approach in designing structures in seismic prone areas.
The wide breadth of expressive possibilities ranges from metaphorical uses of seismic issues to the more straightforward exposure of seismic technology.
While outcomes of an earthquake architecture can be very diverse in their physical manifestations, architectural expression of seismic principles can also take many forms and levels of sophistication.
Socrates (; Ancient Greek: Σωκράτης, romanized: Sōkrátēs; c.
An enigmatic figure, Socrates authored no texts and is known mainly through the posthumous accounts of classical writers, particularly his students Plato and Xenophon.
These accounts are written as dialogues, in which Socrates and his interlocutors examine a subject in the style of question and answer; they gave rise to the Socratic dialogue literary genre.
Contradictory accounts of Socrates make a reconstruction of his philosophy nearly impossible, a situation known as the Socratic problem.
Socrates was a polarizing figure in Athenian society.
In 399 BC, he was accused of impiety and corrupting the youth.
After a trial that lasted a day, he was sentenced to death.
As related by Plato, he was put to death by administration of poison after refusing offers from allies to help him escape.
Plato's dialogues are among the most comprehensive accounts of Socrates to survive from antiquity.
They demonstrate the Socratic approach to areas of philosophy including epistemology and ethics.
The Platonic Socrates lends his name to the concept of the Socratic method, and also to Socratic irony.
The Socratic method of questioning, or elenchus, takes shape in dialogue using short questions and answers, epitomized by those Platonic texts in which Socrates and his interlocutors examine various aspects of an issue or an abstract meaning, usually relating to one of the virtues, and find themselves at an impasse, unable to define what they thought they understood.
Socrates frequently proclaims his ignorance, saying that he is only sure that he does not know.
Socrates exerted a strong influence on philosophers in later antiquity and has continued to do so in the modern era.
He was studied by medieval and Islamic scholars and played an important role in the thought of the Italian Renaissance, particularly within the humanist movement.
Interest in him continued unabated, as reflected in the works of Søren Kierkegaard and Friedrich Nietzsche.
Depictions of Socrates in art, literature, and popular culture have made him a widely known figure in the Western philosophical tradition.
Socrates did not document his teachings.
All that is known about him comes from the accounts of others: mainly the philosopher Plato and the historian Xenophon, who were both his pupils; the Athenian comic dramatist Aristophanes (Socrates's contemporary); and Plato's pupil Aristotle, who was born after Socrates's death.
The often contradictory stories from these ancient accounts only serve to complicate scholars' ability to reconstruct Socrates's true thoughts reliably, a predicament known as the Socratic problem.
The works of Plato, Xenophon, and other authors who use the character of Socrates as an investigative tool, are written in the form of a dialogue between Socrates and his interlocutors and provide the main source of information on Socrates's life and thought.
Socratic dialogues (logos sokratikos) was a term coined by Aristotle to describe this newly formed literary genre.
While the exact dates of their composition are unknown, some were probably written after Socrates's death.
As Aristotle first noted, the extent to which the dialogues portray Socrates authentically is a matter of some debate.
An honest man, Xenophon was no trained philosopher.
He could neither fully conceptualize nor articulate Socrates's arguments.
He admired Socrates for his intelligence, patriotism, and courage on the battlefield.
He discusses Socrates in four works: the Memorabilia, the Oeconomicus, the Symposium, and the Apology of Socrates.
He also mentions a story featuring Socrates in his Anabasis.
Oeconomicus recounts a discussion on practical household management.
Like Plato's Apology, Xenophon's Apologia describes the trial of Socrates, but the works diverge substantially and, according to W.
Guthrie, Xenophon's account portrays a Socrates of "intolerable smugness and complacency".
Symposium is a dialogue of Socrates with other prominent Athenians during an after-dinner discussion, but is quite different from Plato's Symposium: there is no overlap in the guest list.
In Memorabilia, he defends Socrates from the accusations of corrupting the youth and being against the gods; essentially, it is a collection of various stories gathered together to construct a new apology for Socrates.
Plato's representation of Socrates is not straightforward.
Plato was a pupil of Socrates and outlived him by five decades.
How trustworthy Plato is in representing the attributes of Socrates is a matter of debate; the view that he did not represent views other than Socrates's own is not shared by many contemporary scholars.
A driver of this doubt is the inconsistency of the character of Socrates that he presents.
One common but not universally accepted account of this inconsistency is that Plato initially tried accurately to represent the historical Socrates, while later in his writings putting his own views into Socrates's mouth.
Under this understanding, there is a distinction between the Socratic Socrates of Plato's earlier works and the Platonic Socrates of Plato's later writings, although the boundary between the two seems blurred and the presumed chronology rests on little evidence.
Xenophon's and Plato's accounts differ in their presentations of Socrates as a person.
Xenophon's Socrates is duller, less humorous and less ironic than Plato's.
Xenophon's Socrates also lacks the philosophical features of Plato's Socrates—ignorance, the Socratic method or elenchus—and places more emphasis on enkrateia (self-control) than Plato's Socrates.
Generally, logoi Sokratikoi cannot help us to reconstruct the historical Socrates even in cases where their narratives overlap, as authors may have influenced each other's accounts.
Writers of Athenian comedy, including Aristophanes, also commented on Socrates.
Aristophanes's most important comedy with respect to Socrates is The Clouds, in which Socrates is a central character.
In this drama, Aristophanes presents a caricature of Socrates that leans towards sophism, ridiculing Socrates as an absurd atheist.
Socrates in Clouds is interested in natural philosophy, which conforms to Plato's depiction of him in Phaedo.
What is certain is that by the age of 45, Socrates had already captured the interest of Athenians as a philosopher.
It is not clear whether Aristophanes's work is useful in reconstructing the historical Socrates.
Other ancient authors who wrote about Socrates were Aeschines of Sphettus, Antisthenes, Aristippus, Bryson, Cebes, Crito, Euclid of Megara, Phaedo and Aristotle, all of whom wrote after Socrates's death.
Aristotle was not a contemporary of Socrates; he studied under Plato at the latter's Academy for twenty years.
Aristotle treats Socrates without the bias of Xenophon and Plato, who had an emotional tie with Socrates, and he scrutinizes Socrates's doctrines as a philosopher.
Aristotle was familiar with the various written and unwritten stories of Socrates.
His role in understanding Socrates is limited.
He does not write extensively on Socrates; and, when he does, he is mainly preoccupied with the early dialogues of Plato.
There are also general doubts on his reliability on the history of philosophy.
Still, his testimony is vital in understanding Socrates.
In a seminal work titled "The Worth of Socrates as a Philosopher" (1818), the philosopher Friedrich Schleiermacher attacked Xenophon's accounts; his attack was widely accepted.
Schleiermacher criticized Xenophon for his naïve representation of Socrates.
Xenophon was a soldier, argued Schleiermacher, and was therefore not well placed to articulate Socratic ideas.
Furthermore, Xenophon was biased in his depiction of his former friend and teacher: he believed Socrates was treated unfairly by Athens, and sought to prove his point of view rather than to provide an impartial account.
The result, said Schleiermacher, was that Xenophon portrayed Socrates as an uninspiring philosopher.
By the early twentieth century, Xenophon's account was largely rejected.
The philosopher Karl Joel, basing his arguments on Aristotle's interpretation of logos sokratikos, suggested that the Socratic dialogues are mostly fictional: according to Joel, the dialogues' authors were just mimicking some Socratic traits of dialogue.
In the mid-twentieth century, philosophers such as Olof Gigon and Eugène Dupréel, based on Joel's arguments, proposed that the study of Socrates should focus on the various versions of his character and beliefs rather than aiming to reconstruct a historical Socrates.
Later, ancient philosophy scholar Gregory Vlastos suggested that the early Socratic dialogues of Plato were more compatible with other evidence for a historical Socrates than his later writings, an argument that is based on inconsistencies in Plato's own evolving depiction of Socrates.
Vlastos totally disregarded Xenophon's account except when it agreed with Plato's.
More recently, Charles H.
Kahn has reinforced the skeptical stance on the unsolvable Socratic problem, suggesting that only Plato's Apology has any historical significance.
Socrates was born in 470 or 469 BC to Sophroniscus and Phaenarete, a stoneworker and a midwife, respectively, in the Athenian deme of Alopece; therefore, he was an Athenian citizen, having been born to relatively affluent Athenians.
He lived close to his father's relatives and inherited, as was customary, part of his father's estate, securing a life reasonably free of financial concerns.
His education followed the laws and customs of Athens.
He learned the basic skills of reading and writing and, like most wealthy Athenians, received extra lessons in various other fields such as gymnastics, poetry and music.
He was married twice (which came first is not clear): his marriage to Xanthippe took place when Socrates was in his fifties, and another marriage was with a daughter of Aristides, an Athenian statesman.
He had three sons with Xanthippe.
Socrates fulfilled his military service during the Peloponnesian War and distinguished himself in three campaigns, according to Plato.
Another incident that reflects Socrates's respect for the law is the arrest of Leon the Salaminian.
As Plato describes in his Apology, Socrates and four others were summoned to the Tholos and told by representatives of the Thirty Tyrants (which began ruling in 404 BC) to arrest Leon for execution.
Again Socrates was the sole abstainer, choosing to risk the tyrants' wrath and retribution rather than to participate in what he considered to be a crime.
Socrates attracted great interest from the Athenian public and especially the Athenian youth.
He was notoriously ugly, having a flat turned-up nose, bulging eyes and a large belly; his friends joked about his appearance.
Socrates was indifferent to material pleasures, including his own appearance and personal comfort.
He neglected personal hygiene, bathed rarely, walked barefoot, and owned only one ragged coat.
He moderated his eating, drinking, and sex, although he did not practice full abstention.
Although Socrates was attracted to youth, he resisted his passion for them because, as Plato describes, he was more interested in educating their souls and did not seek sex from his disciples.
Politically, he did not take sides in the rivalry between the democrats and the oligarchs in Athens; he criticized both.
The character of Socrates as exhibited in Apology, Crito, Phaedo and Symposium concurs with other sources to an extent that gives confidence in Plato's depiction of Socrates in these works as being representative of the real Socrates.
Socrates died in Athens in 399 BC after a trial for impiety (asebeia) and the corruption of the young.
He spent his last day in prison among friends and followers who offered him a route to escape, which he refused.
He died the next morning, in accordance with his sentence, after drinking poison hemlock.
According to the Phaedo, his last words were: “Crito, we owe a rooster to Asclepius.
Don't forget to pay the debt.
In 399 BC, Socrates was formally accused of corrupting the minds of the youth of Athens, and for asebeia (impiety), i.
At the trial, Socrates defended himself unsuccessfully.
He was found guilty by a majority vote cast by a jury of hundreds of male Athenian citizens and, according to the custom, proposed his own penalty: that he should be given free food and housing by the state for the services he rendered to the city, or alternatively, that he be fined one mina of silver (according to him, all he had).
The jurors declined his offer and ordered the death penalty.
Of all the works written about Socrates' trial, only three survive: Plato's Apology, Xenophon's Apology, and Xenophon's Memorabilia.
Socrates was charged in a politically tense climate.
In 404 BC, the Athenians had been crushed by Spartans at the decisive naval Battle of Aegospotami, and subsequently, the Spartans laid siege to Athens.
They replaced the democratic government with a new, pro-oligarchic government, named the Thirty Tyrants.
Because of their tyrannical measures, some Athenians organized to overthrow the Tyrants—and, indeed, they managed to do so briefly—until a Spartan request for aid from the Thirty arrived and a compromise was sought.
When the Spartans left again, however, democrats seized the opportunity to kill the oligarchs and reclaim the government of Athens.
The accusations against Socrates were initiated by a poet, Meletus, who asked for the death penalty in accordance with the charge of asebeia.
Other accusers were Anytus and Lycon.
After a month or two, in late spring or early summer, the trial started and likely went on for most of one day.
There were two main sources for the religion-based accusations.
First, Socrates had rejected the anthropomorphism of traditional Greek religion by denying that the gods did bad things like humans do.
Second, he seemed to believe in a daimonion—an inner voice with, as his accusers suggested, divine origin.
Plato's Apology starts with Socrates answering the various rumours against him that have given rise to the indictment.
First, Socrates defends himself against the rumour that he is an atheist naturalist philosopher, as portrayed in Aristophanes's The Clouds; or a sophist.
Against the allegations of corrupting the youth, Socrates answers that he has never corrupted anyone intentionally, since corrupting someone would carry the risk of being corrupted back in return, and that would be illogical, since corruption is undesirable.
On the second charge, Socrates asks for clarification.
Meletus responds by repeating the accusation that Socrates is an atheist.
Socrates notes the contradiction between atheism and worshipping false gods.
He then claims that he is "God's gift" to the Athenians, since his activities ultimately benefit Athens; thus, in condemning him to death, Athens itself will be the greatest loser.
After that, he says that even though no human can reach wisdom, seeking it is the best thing someone can do, implying money and prestige are not as precious as commonly thought.
Socrates was given the chance to offer alternative punishments for himself after being found guilty.
He could have requested permission to flee Athens and live in exile, but he did not do so.
According to Xenophon, Socrates made no proposals, while according to Plato he suggested free meals should be provided for him daily in recognition of his worth to Athens or, more in earnest, that a fine should be imposed on him.
The jurors favoured the death penalty by making him drink a cup of hemlock (a poisonous liquid).
In return, Socrates warned jurors and Athenians that criticism of them by his many disciples was inescapable, unless they became good men.
After a delay caused by Athenian religious ceremonies, Socrates spent his last day in prison.
His friends visited him and offered him an opportunity to escape, which he declined.
The question of what motivated Athenians to convict Socrates remains controversial among scholars.
There are two theories.
The first is that Socrates was convicted on religious grounds; the second, that he was accused and convicted for political reasons.
Another, more recent, interpretation synthesizes the religious and political theories, arguing that religion and state were not separate in ancient Athens.
The argument for religious persecution is supported by the fact that Plato's and Xenophon's accounts of the trial mostly focus on the charges of impiety.
In those accounts, Socrates is portrayed as making no effort to dispute the fact that he did not believe in the Athenian gods.
Against this argument stands the fact that many skeptics and atheist philosophers during this time were not prosecuted.
According to the argument for political persecution, Socrates was targeted because he was perceived as a threat to democracy.
It was true that Socrates did not stand for democracy during the reign of the Thirty Tyrants and that most of his pupils were against the democrats.
The case for it being a political persecution is usually challenged by the existence of an amnesty that was granted to Athenian citizens in 403 BC to prevent escalation to civil war after the fall of the Thirty.
However, as the text from Socrates's trial and other texts reveal, the accusers could have fuelled their rhetoric using events prior to 403 BC.
A fundamental characteristic of Plato's Socrates is the Socratic method, or the method of refutation (elenchus).
It is most prominent in the early works of Plato, such as Apology, Crito, Gorgias, Republic I, and others.
The typical elenchus proceeds as follows.
Socrates initiates a discussion about a topic with a supposed expert on the subject, usually in the company of some young men and boys, and by dialogue proves the expert's beliefs and arguments to be contradictory.
Socrates initiates the dialogue by asking his interlocutor for a definition of the subject.
As he asks more questions, the interlocutor's answers eventually contradict the first definition.
The conclusion is that the expert did not really know the definition in the first place.
The interlocutor may come up with a different definition.
That new definition, in turn, comes under the scrutiny of Socratic questioning.
With each round of question and answer, Socrates and his interlocutor hope to approach the truth.
More often, they continue to reveal their ignorance.
Since the interlocutors' definitions most commonly represent the mainstream opinion on a matter, the discussion places doubt on the common opinion.
Socrates also tests his own opinions through the Socratic method.
Thus Socrates does not teach a fixed philosophical doctrine.
Rather, he acknowledges his own ignorance while searching for truth with his pupils and interlocutors.
Scholars have questioned the validity and the exact nature of the Socratic method, or indeed if there even was a Socratic method.
In 1982, the scholar of ancient philosophy Gregory Vlastos claimed that the Socratic method could not be used to establish the truth or falsehood of a proposition.
Rather, Vlastos argued, it was a way to show that an interlocutor's beliefs were inconsistent.
There have been two main lines of thought regarding this view, depending on whether it is accepted that Socrates is seeking to prove a claim wrong.
According to the first line of thought, known as the constructivist approach, Socrates indeed seeks to refute a claim by this method, and the method helps in reaching affirmative statements.
The non-constructivist approach holds that Socrates merely wants to establish the inconsistency between the premises and the conclusion of the initial argument.
Socrates starts his discussions by prioritizing the search for definitions.
In most cases, Socrates initiates his discourse with an expert on a subject by seeking a definition—by asking, for example, what virtue, goodness, justice, or courage is.
To establish a definition, Socrates first gathers clear examples of a virtue and then seeks to establish what they had in common.
According to Guthrie, Socrates lived in an era when sophists had challenged the meaning of various virtues, questioning their substance; Socrates's quest for a definition was an attempt to clear the atmosphere from their radical skepticism.
Some scholars have argued that Socrates does not endorse the priority of definition as a principle, because they have identified cases where he does not do so.
Some have argued that this priority of definition comes from Plato rather than Socrates.
Philosopher Peter Geach, accepting that Socrates endorses the priority of definition, finds the technique fallacious.
Αccording to Geach, one may know a proposition even if one cannot define the terms in which the proposition is stated.
Plato's Socrates often claims that he is aware of his own lack of knowledge, especially when discussing ethical concepts such as arete (i.
For example, during his trial, with his life at stake, Socrates says: "I thought Evenus a happy man, if he really possesses this art (technē), and teaches for so moderate a fee.
Certainly I would pride and preen myself if I knew (epistamai) these things, but I do not know (epistamai) them, gentlemen".
In some of Plato's dialogues, Socrates appears to credit himself with some knowledge, and can even seem strongly opinionated for a man who professes his own ignorance.
There are varying explanations of the Socratic inconsistency (other than that Socrates is simply being inconsistent).
One explanation is that Socrates is being either ironic or modest for pedagogical purposes: he aims to let his interlocutor to think for himself rather than guide him to a prefixed answer to his philosophical questions.
Another explanation is that Socrates holds different interpretations of the meaning of "knowledge".
Knowledge, for him, might mean systematic understanding of an ethical subject, on which Socrates firmly rejects any kind of mastery; or might refer to lower-level cognition, which Socrates may accept that he possesses.
In any case, there is a consensus that Socrates accepts that acknowledging one's lack of knowledge is the first step towards wisdom.
Socrates is known for disavowing knowledge, a claim encapsulated in the saying "I know that I know nothing".
This is often attributed to Socrates on the basis of a statement in Plato's Apology, though the same view is repeatedly found elsewhere in Plato's early writings on Socrates.
In other statements, though, he implies or even claims that he does have knowledge.
For example, in Plato's Apology Socrates says: ".
In his debate with Callicles, he says: ".
I know well that if you will agree with me on those things which my soul believes, those things will be the very truth.
Whether Socrates genuinely thought he lacked knowledge or merely feigned a belief in his own ignorance remains a matter of debate.
A common interpretation is that he was indeed feigning modesty.
According to Norman Gulley, Socrates did this to entice his interlocutors to speak with him.
On the other hand, Terence Irwin claims that Socrates's words should be taken literally.
Gregory Vlastos argues that there is enough evidence to refute both claims.
In his view, for Socrates, there are two separate meanings of "knowledge": Knowledge-C and Knowledge-E (C stands for "certain", and E stands for elenchus, i.
Knowledge-C is something unquestionable whereas Knowledge-E is the knowledge derived from Socrates's elenchus.
Thus, Socrates speaks the truth when he says he knows-C something, and he is also truthful when saying he knows-E, for example, that it is evil for someone to disobey his superiors, as he claims in Apology.
Not all scholars have agreed with this semantic dualism.
Lesher has argued that Socrates claimed in various dialogues that one word is linked to one meaning (i.
Lesher suggests that although Socrates claimed that he had no knowledge about the nature of virtues, he thought that in some cases, people can know some ethical propositions.
There is a widespread assumption that Socrates was an ironist, mostly based on the depiction of Socrates by Plato and Aristotle.
Socrates's irony is so subtle and slightly humorous that it often leaves the reader wondering if Socrates is making an intentional pun.
Plato's Euthyphro is filled with Socratic irony.
The story begins when Socrates is meeting with Euthyphro, a man who has accused his own father of murder.
When Socrates first hears the details of the story, he comments, "It is not, I think, any random person who could do this [prosecute one's father] correctly, but surely one who is already far progressed in wisdom".
When Euthyphro boasts about his understanding of divinity, Socrates responds that it is "most important that I become your student".
Socrates is commonly seen as ironic when using praise to flatter or when addressing his interlocutors.
Scholars are divided on why Socrates uses irony.
According to an opinion advanced since the Hellenistic period, Socratic irony is a playful way to get the audience's attention.
Another line of thought holds that Socrates conceals his philosophical message with irony, making it accessible only to those who can separate the parts of his statements which are ironic from those which are not.
Gregory Vlastos has identified a more complex pattern of irony in Socrates.
In Vlastos's view, Socrates's words have a double meaning, both ironic and not.
One example is when he denies having knowledge.
Vlastos suggests that Socrates is being ironic when he says he has no knowledge (where "knowledge" means a lower form of cognition); while, according to another sense of "knowledge", Socrates is serious when he says he has no knowledge of ethical matters.
This opinion is not shared by many other scholars.
For Socrates, the pursuit of eudaimonia motivates all human action, directly or indirectly.
Virtue and knowledge are linked, in Socrates's view, to eudaimonia, but how closely he considered them to be connected is still debated.
Some argue that Socrates thought that virtue and eudaimonia are identical.
According to another view, virtue serves as a means to eudaimonia (the "identical" and "sufficiency" theses, respectively).
Another point of debate is whether, according to Socrates, people desire what is in fact good—or, rather, simply what they perceive as good.
Moral intellectualism refers to the prominent role Socrates gave to knowledge.
He believed that all virtue was based on knowledge (hence Socrates is characterized as a virtue intellectualist).
He also believed that humans were guided by the cognitive power to comprehend what they desire, while diminishing the role of impulses (a view termed motivational intellectualism).
In Plato's Protagoras (345c4–e6), Socrates implies that "no one errs willingly", which has become the hallmark of Socratic virtue intellectualism.
In Socratic moral philosophy, priority is given to the intellect as being the way to live a good life; Socrates deemphasizes irrational beliefs or passions.
Plato's dialogues that support Socrates's intellectual motivism—as this thesis is named—are mainly the Gorgias (467c–8e, where Socrates discusses the actions of a tyrant that do not benefit him) and Meno (77d–8b, where Socrates explains to Meno his view that no one wants bad things, unless they do not know what is good and bad in the first place).
Scholars have been puzzled by Socrates's view that akrasia (acting because of one's irrational passions, contrary to one's knowledge or beliefs) is impossible.
Most believe that Socrates left no space for irrational desires, although some claim that Socrates acknowledged the existence of irrational motivations, but denied they play a primary role in decision-making.
Socrates's religious nonconformity challenged the views of his times and his critique reshaped religious discourse for the coming centuries.
In Ancient Greece, organized religion was fragmented, celebrated in a number of festivals for specific gods, such as the City Dionysia, or in domestic rituals, and there were no sacred texts.
Religion intermingled with the daily life of citizens, who performed their personal religious duties mainly with sacrifices to various gods.
Whether Socrates was a practicing man of religion or a 'provocateur atheist' has been a point of debate since ancient times; his trial included impiety accusations, and the controversy has not yet ceased.
Socrates discusses divinity and the soul mostly in Alcibiades, Euthyphro, and Apology.
In Alcibiades Socrates links the human soul to divinity, concluding "Then this part of her resembles God, and whoever looks at this, and comes to know all that is divine, will gain thereby the best knowledge of himself.
Socrates, in Euthyphro, reaches a conclusion which takes him far from the age's usual practice: he considers sacrifices to the gods to be useless, especially when they are driven by the hope of receiving a reward in return.
Instead, he calls for philosophy and the pursuit of knowledge to be the principal way of worshipping the gods.
His rejection of traditional forms of piety, connecting them to self-interest, implied that Athenians should seek religious experience by self-examination.
Socrates argued that the gods were inherently wise and just, a perception far from traditional religion at that time.
In Euthyphro, the Euthyphro dilemma arises.
Socrates questions his interlocutor about the relationship between piety and the will of a powerful god: Is something good because it is the will of this god, or is it the will of this god because it is good?
In other words, does piety follow the good, or the god?
The trajectory of Socratic thought contrasts with traditional Greek theology, which took lex talionis (the eye for an eye principle) for granted.
Socrates thought that goodness is independent from gods, and gods must themselves be pious.
Socrates affirms a belief in gods in Plato's Apology, where he says to the jurors that he acknowledges gods more than his accusers.
For Plato's Socrates, the existence of gods is taken for granted; in none of his dialogues does he probe whether gods exist or not.
In Apology, a case for Socrates being agnostic can be made, based on his discussion of the great unknown after death, and in Phaedo (the dialogue with his students in his last day) Socrates gives expression to a clear belief in the immortality of the soul.
He also believed in oracles, divinations and other messages from gods.
These signs did not offer him any positive belief on moral issues; rather, they were predictions of unfavorable future events.
In Xenophon's Memorabilia, Socrates constructs an argument close to the contemporary teleological intelligent-design argument.
He claims that since there are many features in the universe that exhibit "signs of forethought" (e.
He then deduces that the creator should be omniscient and omnipotent and also that it created the universe for the advance of humankind, since humans naturally have many abilities that other animals do not.
At times, Socrates speaks of a single deity, while at other times he refers to plural "gods".
This has been interpreted to mean that he either believed that a supreme deity commanded other gods, or that various gods were parts, or manifestations, of this single deity.
The relationship of Socrates's religious beliefs with his strict adherence to rationalism has been subject to debate.
Philosophy professor Mark McPherran suggests that Socrates interpreted every divine sign through secular rationality for confirmation.
Professor of ancient philosophy A.
Long suggests that it is anachronistic to suppose that Socrates believed the religious and rational realms were separate.
Socrates gave a brief description of this daimonion at his trial (Apology 31c–d): ".
The reason for this is something you have heard me frequently mention in different places—namely, the fact that I experience something divine and daimonic, as Meletus has inscribed in his indictment, by way of mockery.
It started in my childhood, the occurrence of a particular voice.
Whenever it occurs, it always deters me from the course of action I was intending to engage in, but it never gives me positive advice.
It is this that has opposed my practicing politics, and I think its doing so has been absolutely fine.
Socrates's theory of virtue states that all virtues are essentially one, since they are a form of knowledge.
For Socrates, the reason a person is not good is because they lack knowledge.
Since knowledge is united, virtues are united as well.
Another famous dictum—"no one errs willingly"—also derives from this theory.
In Protagoras, Socrates argues for the unity of virtues using the example of courage: if someone knows what the relevant danger is, they can undertake a risk.
Aristotle comments: " .
Socrates the elder thought that the end of life was knowledge of virtue, and he used to seek for the definition of justice, courage, and each of the parts of virtue, and this was a reasonable approach, since he thought that all virtues were sciences, and that as soon as one knew [for example] justice, he would be just.
Some texts suggest that Socrates had love affairs with Alcibiades and other young persons; others suggest that Socrates's friendships with young boys sought only to improve them and were not sexual.
In Gorgias, Socrates claims he was a dual lover of Alcibiades and philosophy, and his flirtatiousness is evident in Protagoras, Meno (76a–c) and Phaedrus (227c–d).
However, the exact nature of his relationship with Alcibiades is not clear; Socrates was known for his self-restraint, while Alcibiades admits in the Symposium that he had tried to seduce Socrates but failed.
The Socratic theory of love is mostly deduced from Lysis, where Socrates discusses love at a wrestling school in the company of Lysis and his friends.
They start their dialogue by investigating parental love and how it manifests with respect to the freedom and boundaries that parents set for their children.
Socrates concludes that if Lysis is utterly useless, nobody will love him—not even his parents.
While most scholars believe this text was intended to be humorous, it has also been suggested that Lysis shows Socrates held an egoistic view of love, according to which we only love people who are useful to us in some way.
Other scholars disagree with this view, arguing that Socrates's doctrine leaves room for non-egoistic love for a spouse; still others deny that Socrates suggests any egoistic motivation at all.
In Symposium, Socrates argues that children offer the false impression of immortality to their parents, and this misconception yields a form of unity among them.
Scholars also note that for Socrates, love is rational.
Socrates, who claims to know only that he does not know, makes an exception (in Plato's Symposium), where he says he will tell the truth about Love, which he learned from a 'clever woman'.
Classicist Armand D'Angour has made the case that Socrates was in his youth close to Aspasia, and that Diotima, to whom Socrates attributes his understanding of love in Symposium, is based on her; however, it is also possible that Diotima really existed.
While Socrates was involved in public political and cultural debates, it is hard to define his exact political philosophy.
In Plato's Gorgias, he tells Callicles: "I believe that I'm one of a few Athenians—so as not to say I'm the only one, but the only one among our contemporaries—to take up the true political craft and practice the true politics.
This is because the speeches I make on each occasion do not aim at gratification but at what's best.
He never ran for office or suggested any legislation.
Rather, he aimed to help the city flourish by "improving" its citizens.
As a citizen, he abided by the law.
He obeyed the rules and carried out his military duty by fighting wars abroad.
His dialogues, however, make little mention of contemporary political decisions, such as the Sicilian Expedition.
Socrates spent his time conversing with citizens, among them powerful members of Athenian society, scrutinizing their beliefs and bringing the contradictions of their ideas to light.
Socrates believed he was doing them a favor since, for him, politics was about shaping the moral landscape of the city through philosophy rather than electoral procedures.
There is a debate over where Socrates stood in the polarized Athenian political climate, which was divided between oligarchs and democrats.
While there is no clear textual evidence, one widely held theory holds that Socrates leaned towards democracy: he disobeyed the one order that the oligarchic government of the Thirty Tyrants gave him; he respected the laws and political system of Athens (which were formulated by democrats); and, according to this argument, his affinity for the ideals of democratic Athens was a reason why he did not want to escape prison and the death penalty.
On the other hand, there is some evidence that Socrates leaned towards oligarchy: most of his friends supported oligarchy, he was contemptuous of the opinion of the many and was critical of the democratic process, and Protagoras shows some anti-democratic elements.
A less mainstream argument suggests that Socrates favoured democratic republicanism, a theory that prioritizes active participation in public life and concern for the city.
Yet another suggestion is that Socrates endorsed views in line with liberalism, a political ideology formed in the Age of Enlightenment.
This argument is mostly based on Crito and Apology, where Socrates talks about the mutually beneficial relationship between the city and its citizens.
According to Socrates, citizens are morally autonomous and free to leave the city if they wish—but, by staying within the city, they also accept the laws and the city's authority over them.
On the other hand, Socrates has been seen as the first proponent of civil disobedience.
Socrates's strong objection to injustice, along with his refusal to serve the Thirty Tyrants' order to arrest Leon, are suggestive of this line.
As he says in Critias, "One ought never act unjustly, even to repay a wrong that has been done to oneself.
Socrates's impact was immense in philosophy after his death.
With the exception of the Epicureans and the Pyrrhonists, almost all philosophical currents after Socrates traced their roots to him: Plato's Academy, Aristotle's Lyceum, the Cynics, and the Stoics.
Interest in Socrates kept increasing until the third century AD.
The various schools differed in response to fundamental questions such as the purpose of life or the nature of arete (virtue), since Socrates had not handed them an answer, and therefore, philosophical schools subsequently diverged greatly in their interpretation of his thought.
He was considered to have shifted the focus of philosophy from a study of the natural world, as was the case for pre-Socratic philosophers, to a study of human affairs.
Immediate followers of Socrates were his pupils, Euclid of Megara, Aristippus, and Antisthenes, who drew differing conclusions among themselves and followed independent trajectories.
The full doctrines of Socrates's pupils are difficult to reconstruct.
Antisthenes had a profound contempt of material goods.
According to him, virtue was all that mattered.
Diogenes and the Cynics continued this line of thought.
On the opposite end, Aristippus endorsed the accumulation of wealth and lived a luxurious life.
After leaving Athens and returning to his home city of Cyrene, he founded the Cyrenaic philosophical school which was based on hedonism, and endorsing living an easy life with physical pleasures.
His school passed to his grandson, bearing the same name.
There is a dialogue in Xenophon's work in which Aristippus claims he wants to live without wishing to rule or be ruled by others.
In addition, Aristippus maintained a skeptical stance on epistemology, claiming that we can be certain only of our own feelings.
This view resonates with the Socratic understanding of ignorance.
Euclid was a contemporary of Socrates.
After Socrates's trial and death, he left Athens for the nearby town of Megara, where he founded a school, named the Megarians.
His theory was built on the pre-Socratic monism of Parmenides.
Euclid continued Socrates's thought, focusing on the nature of virtue.
The Stoics relied heavily on Socrates.
They applied the Socratic method as a tool to avoid inconsistencies.
Their moral doctrines focused on how to live a smooth life through wisdom and virtue.
The Stoics assigned virtue a crucial role in attaining happiness and also prioritized the relation between goodness and ethical excellence, all of which echoed Socratic thought.
At the same time, the philosophical current of Platonism claimed Socrates as its predecessor, in ethics and in its theory of knowledge.
Arcesilaus, who became the head of the Academy about 80 years after its founding by Plato, radically changed the Academy's doctrine to what is now known as Academic Skepticism, centered on the Socratic philosophy of ignorance.
The Academic Skeptics competed with the Stoics over who was Socrates's true heir with regard to ethics.
While the Stoics insisted on knowledge-based ethics, Arcesilaus relied on Socratic ignorance.
The Stoics' reply to Arcesilaus was that Socratic ignorance was part of Socratic irony (they themselves disapproved the use of irony), an argument that ultimately became the dominant narrative of Socrates in later antiquity.
While Aristotle considered Socrates an important philosopher, Socrates was not a central figure in Aristotelian thought.
One of Aristotle's pupils, Aristoxenus even authored a book detailing Socrates's scandals.
The Epicureans were antagonistic to Socrates.
They attacked him for superstition, criticizing his belief in his daimonion and his regard for the oracle at Delphi.
They also criticized Socrates for his character and various faults, and focusing mostly on his irony, which was deemed inappropriate for a philosopher and unseemly for a teacher.
The Pyrrhonists were also antagonistic to Socrates, accusing him of being a prater about ethics, who engaged in mock humility, and who sneered at and mocked people.
Socratic thought found its way to the Islamic Middle East alongside that of Aristotle and the Stoics.
Plato's works on Socrates, as well as other ancient Greek literature, were translated into Arabic by early Muslim scholars such as Al-Kindi, Jabir ibn Hayyan, and the Muʿtazila.
For Muslim scholars, Socrates was hailed and admired for combining his ethics with his lifestyle, perhaps because of the resemblance in this regard with Muhammad's personality.
Socratic doctrines were altered to match Islamic faith: according to Muslim scholars, Socrates made arguments for monotheism and for the temporality of this world and rewards in the next life.
His influence in the Arabic-speaking world continues to the present day.
In medieval times, little of Socrates's thought survived in the Christian world as a whole; however, works on Socrates from Christian scholars such as Lactantius, Eusebius and Augustine were maintained in the Byzantine Empire, where Socrates was studied under a Christian lens.
After the fall of Constantinople, many of the texts were brought back into the world of Roman Christianity, where they were translated into Latin.
Overall, ancient Socratic philosophy, like the rest of classical literature before the Renaissance, was addressed with skepticism in the Christian world at first.
During the early Italian Renaissance, two different narratives of Socrates developed.
On the one hand, the humanist movement revived interest in classical authors.
Leonardo Bruni translated many of Plato's Socratic dialogues, while his pupil Giannozzo Manetti authored a well-circulated book, a Life of Socrates.
They both presented a civic version of Socrates, according to which Socrates was a humanist and a supporter of republicanism.
Bruni and Manetti were interested in defending secularism as a non-sinful way of life; presenting a view of Socrates that was aligned with Christian morality assisted their cause.
In doing so, they had to censor parts of his dialogues, especially those which appeared to promote homosexuality or any possibility of pederasty (with Alcibiades), or which suggested that the Socratic daimon was a god.
On the other hand, a different picture of Socrates was presented by Italian Neoplatonists, led by the philosopher and priest Marsilio Ficino.
Ficino was impressed by Socrates's un-hierarchical and informal way teaching, which he tried to replicate.
Ficino portrayed a holy picture of Socrates, finding parallels with the life of Jesus Christ.
For Ficino and his followers, Socratic ignorance signified his acknowledgement that all wisdom is God-given (through the Socratic daimon).
In early modern France, Socrates's image was dominated by features of his private life rather than his philosophical thought, in various novels and satirical plays.
Some thinkers used Socrates to highlight and comment upon controversies of their own era, like Théophile de Viau who portrayed a Christianized Socrates accused of atheism, while for Voltaire, the figure of Socrates represented a reason-based theist.
Michel de Montaigne wrote extensively on Socrates, linking him to rationalism as a counterweight to contemporary religious fanatics.
In the 18th century, German idealism revived philosophical interest in Socrates, mainly through Hegel's work.
For Hegel, Socrates marked a turning point in the history of humankind by the introduction of the principle of free subjectivity or self-determination.
While Hegel hails Socrates for his contribution, he nonetheless justifies the Athenian court, for Socrates's insistence upon self-determination would be destructive of the Sittlichkeit (a Hegelian term signifying the way of life as shaped by the institutions and laws of the State).
Also, Hegel sees the Socratic use of rationalism as a continuation of Protagoras' focus on human reasoning (as encapsulated in the motto homo mensura: "man is the measure of all things"), but modified: it is our reasoning that can help us reach objective conclusions about reality.
Also, Hegel considered Socrates as a predecessor of later ancient skeptic philosophers, even though he never clearly explained why.
Søren Kierkegaard considered Socrates his teacher, and authored his master's thesis on him, The Concept of Irony with Continual Reference to Socrates.
There he argues that Socrates is not a moral philosopher but is purely an ironist.
He also focused on Socrates's avoidance of writing: for Kierkegaard, this avoidance was a sign of humility, deriving from Socrates's acceptance of his ignorance.
Not only did Socrates not write anything down, according to Kierkegaard, but his contemporaries misconstrued and misunderstood him as a philosopher, leaving us with an almost impossible task in comprehending Socratic thought.
Only Plato's Apology was close to the real Socrates, in Kierkegaard's view.
In his writings, he revisited Socrates quite frequently; in his later work, Kierkegaard found ethical elements in Socratic thought.
Socrates was not only a subject of study for Kierkegaard, he was a model as well: Kierkegaard paralleled his task as a philosopher to Socrates.
He writes, "The only analogy I have before me is Socrates; my task is a Socratic task, to audit the definition of what it is to be a Christian", with his aim being to bring society closer to the Christian ideal, since he believed that Christianity had become a formality, void of any Christian essence.
Kierkegaard denied being a Christian, as Socrates denied possessing any knowledge.
Friedrich Nietzsche resented Socrates's contributions to Western culture.
In his first book, The Birth of Tragedy (1872), Nietzsche held Socrates responsible for what he saw as the deterioration of ancient Greek civilization during the 4th century BC and after.
For Nietzsche, Socrates turned the scope of philosophy from pre-Socratic naturalism to rationalism and intellectualism.
He writes: "I conceive of [the Presocratics] as precursors to a reformation of the Greeks: but not of Socrates"; "with Empedocles and Democritus the Greeks were well on their way towards taking the correct measure of human existence, its unreason, its suffering; they never reached this goal, thanks to Socrates".
The effect, Nietzsche proposed, was a perverse situation that had continued down to his day: our culture is a Socratic culture, he believed.
In a later publication, The Twilight of the Idols (1887), Nietzsche continued his offensive against Socrates, focusing on the arbitrary linking of reason to virtue and happiness in Socratic thinking.
He writes: "I try to understand from what partial and idiosyncratic states the Socratic problem is to be derived: his equation of reason = virtue = happiness.
It was with this absurdity of a doctrine of identity that he fascinated: ancient philosophy never again freed itself [from this fascination]".
From the late 19th century until the early 20th, the most common explanation of Nietzsche's hostility towards Socrates was his anti-rationalism; he considered Socrates the father of European rationalism.
In the mid-20th century, philosopher Walter Kaufmann published an article arguing that Nietzsche admired Socrates.
Current mainstream opinion is that Nietzsche was ambivalent towards Socrates.
Hannah Arendt, Leo Strauss and Karl Popper, after experiencing the horrors of World War II, amidst the rise of totalitarian regimes, saw Socrates as an icon of individual conscience.
Arendt, in Eichmann in Jerusalem (1963), suggests that Socrates's constant questioning and self-reflection could prevent the banality of evil.
Strauss considers Socrates's political thought as paralleling Plato's.
He sees an elitist Socrates in Plato's Republic as exemplifying why the polis is not, and could not be, an ideal way of organizing life, since philosophical truths cannot be digested by the masses.
Popper takes the opposite view: he argues that Socrates opposes Plato's totalitarian ideas.
For Popper, Socratic individualism, along with Athenian democracy, imply Popper's concept of the "open society" as described in his The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945).
Socrate (in French) (6th ed.
Presses universitaires de France.
ISBN 978-2-13-035620-2.
Essays on the philosophy of Socrates.
New York: Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-506757-6.
Rudebusch, George (2009).
Chichester, UK; Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
ISBN 978-1-4051-5085-9.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-287601-0.
Socrates: A Very Short Introduction.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-883598-1.
Vlastos, Gregory (1994).
Cambridge University Press.
ISBN 978-0-521-44735-5.
Aristotle (Ancient Greek: Ἀριστοτέλης, romanized: Aristotélēs; 384–322 BC) was an ancient Greek philosopher and polymath.
His writings span the natural sciences, philosophy, linguistics, economics, politics, psychology, and the arts.
As the founder of the Peripatetic school of philosophy in the Lyceum in Athens, he began the wider Aristotelian tradition that followed, which set the groundwork for the development of modern science.
Little is known about Aristotle's life.
He was born in the city of Stagira in Chalkidiki (northern Greece) during the Classical period.
His father, Nicomachus, died when Aristotle was a child, and he was brought up by a guardian.
At around eighteen years old, he joined Plato's Academy in Athens and remained there until the age of thirty seven (c.
Shortly after Plato died, Aristotle left Athens and, at the request of Philip II of Macedon, tutored his son Alexander the Great beginning in 343 BC.
He established a library in the Lyceum, which helped him to produce many of his hundreds of books on papyrus scrolls.
Though Aristotle wrote many treatises and dialogues for publication, only around a third of his original output has survived, none of it intended for publication.
Aristotle provided a complex synthesis of the various philosophies existing prior to him.
His teachings and methods of inquiry have had a significant impact across the world, and remain a subject of contemporary philosophical discussion.
Aristotle's views profoundly shaped medieval scholarship.
The influence of his physical science extended from late antiquity and the Early Middle Ages into the Renaissance, and was not replaced systematically until the Enlightenment and theories such as classical mechanics were developed.
He influenced Judeo-Islamic philosophies during the Middle Ages, as well as Christian theology, especially the Neoplatonism of the Early Church and the scholastic tradition of the Catholic Church.
Aristotle was revered among medieval Muslim scholars as "The First Teacher", and among medieval Christians like Thomas Aquinas as simply "The Philosopher".
He has been referred to as the first scientist.
His works contain the earliest known systematic study of logic, and were studied by medieval scholars such as Peter Abelard and Jean Buridan.
His influence on logic continued well into the 19th century.
In addition, his ethics, although always influential, has gained renewed interest with the modern advent of virtue ethics.
In general, the details of Aristotle's life are not well-established.
The biographies written in ancient times are often speculative and historians only agree on a few salient points.
Aristotle was born in 384 BC in Stagira, Chalcidice, about 55 km (34 miles) east of modern-day Thessaloniki.
He was the son of Nicomachus, the personal physician of King Amyntas of Macedon, and Phaestis, a woman with origins from Chalcis, Euboea.
Nicomachus was said to have belonged to the medical guild of Asclepiadae and was likely responsible for Aristotle's early interest in biology and medicine.
Ancient tradition held that Aristotle's family descended from the legendary physician Asclepius and his son Machaon.
Both of Aristotle's parents died when he was still at a young age and Proxenus of Atarneus became his guardian.
Although little information about Aristotle's childhood has survived, he probably spent some time in the Macedonian capital Pella, making his first connections with the Macedonian monarchy.
At the age of seventeen or eighteen, Aristotle moved to Athens to continue his education at Plato's Academy.
He became distinguished as a researcher and lecturer, earning for himself the nickname "mind of the school" by his tutor Plato.
In Athens, he probably experienced the Eleusinian Mysteries as he wrote when describing the sights one viewed at the Mysteries, "to experience is to learn" (παθεĩν μαθεĩν).
Aristotle remained in Athens for nearly twenty years before leaving in 348/47 BC after Plato's death.
The traditional story about his departure records that he was disappointed with the academy's direction after control passed to Plato's nephew Speusippus, although it is possible that the anti-Macedonian sentiments in Athens could have also influenced his decision.
Aristotle left with Xenocrates to Assos in Asia Minor, where he was invited by his former fellow student Hermias of Atarneus; he stayed there for a few years, leaving around the time of Hermias' death.
While at Assos, Aristotle and his colleague Theophrastus did extensive research in botany and marine biology, which they later continued at the near-by island of Lesbos.
During this time, Aristotle married Pythias, Hermias's adoptive daughter and niece, and had a daughter whom they also named Pythias.
In 343/42 BC, Aristotle was invited to Pella by Philip II of Macedon to become the tutor to his thirteen-year-old son Alexander; a choice perhaps influenced by the relationship of Aristotle's family with the Macedonian dynasty.
Aristotle taught Alexander at the private school of Mieza, in the gardens of the Nymphs, the royal estate near Pella.
Alexander's education probably included a number of subjects, such as ethics and politics, as well as standard literary texts, like Euripides and Homer.
It is likely that during Aristotle's time in the Macedonian court, other prominent nobles, like Ptolemy and Cassander, would have occasionally attended his lectures.
Aristotle encouraged Alexander toward eastern conquest, and his own attitude towards Persia was strongly ethnocentric.
In one famous example, he counsels Alexander to be "a leader to the Greeks and a despot to the barbarians".
Alexander's education under the guardianship of Aristotle likely lasted for only a few years, as at around the age of sixteen he returned to Pella and was appointed regent of Macedon by his father Philip.
During this time, Aristotle gifted Alexander an annotated copy of the Iliad, which is said to have become one of Alexander's most prized possessions.
Scholars speculate that two of Aristotle's now lost works, On kingship and On behalf of the Colonies, were composed by the philosopher for the young prince.
Aristotle returned to Athens for the second and final time a year after Philip II's assassination in 336 BC.
As a metic, Aristotle could not own property in Athens and thus rented a building known as the Lyceum (named after the sacred grove of Apollo Lykeios), in which he established his own school.
The building included a gymnasium and a colonnade (peripatos), from which the school acquired the name Peripatetic.
Aristotle conducted courses and research at the school for the next twelve years.
He often lectured small groups of distinguished students and, along with some of them, such as Theophrastus, Eudemus, and Aristoxenus, Aristotle built a large library which included manuscripts, maps, and museum objects.
While in Athens, his wife Pythias died and Aristotle became involved with Herpyllis of Stagira.
They had a son whom Aristotle named after his father, Nicomachus.
This period in Athens, between 335 and 323 BC, is when Aristotle is believed to have composed many of his philosophical works.
He wrote many dialogues, of which only fragments have survived.
Those works that have survived are in treatise form and were not, for the most part, intended for widespread publication; they are generally thought to be lecture aids for his students.
His most important treatises include Physics, Metaphysics, Nicomachean Ethics, Politics, On the Soul and Poetics.
Aristotle studied and made significant contributions to "logic, metaphysics, mathematics, physics, biology, botany, ethics, politics, agriculture, medicine, dance, and theatre.
While Alexander deeply admired Aristotle, near the end of his life, the two men became estranged having diverging opinions over issues, like the optimal administration of city-states, the treatment of conquered populations, such as the Persians, and philosophical questions, like the definition of braveness.
A widespread speculation in antiquity suggested that Aristotle played a role in Alexander's death, but the only evidence of this is an unlikely claim made some six years after the death.
Following Alexander's death, anti-Macedonian sentiment in Athens was rekindled.
In 322 BC, Demophilus and Eurymedon the Hierophant reportedly denounced Aristotle for impiety, prompting him to flee to his mother's family estate in Chalcis, Euboea, at which occasion he was said to have stated "I will not allow the Athenians to sin twice against philosophy" – a reference to Athens's trial and execution of Socrates.
He died in Chalcis, Euboea of natural causes later that same year, having named his student Antipater as his chief executor and left a will in which he asked to be buried next to his wife.
Aristotle left his works to Theophrastus, his successor as the head of the Lyceum, who in turn passed them down to Neleus of Scepsis in Asia Minor.
There, the papers remained hidden for protection until they were purchased by the collector Apellicon.
In the meantime, many copies of Aristotle's major works had already begun to circulate and be used in the Lyceum of Athens, Alexandria, and later in Rome.
With the Prior Analytics, Aristotle is credited with the earliest systematic study of logic, and his conception of it was the dominant form of Western logic until 19th-century advances in mathematical logic.
Kant even stated in the Critique of Pure Reason that with Aristotle, logic reached its completion.
Most of Aristotle's work is probably not in its original form, because it was most likely edited by students and later lecturers.
The logical works of Aristotle were compiled into a set of six books called the Organon around 40 BC by Andronicus of Rhodes or others among his followers.
The order of the books (or the teachings from which they are composed) is not certain, but this list was derived from analysis of Aristotle's writings.
It goes from the basics, the analysis of simple terms in the Categories, the analysis of propositions and their elementary relations in On Interpretation, to the study of more complex forms, namely, syllogisms and demonstration (in the Analytics) and dialectics (in the Topics and Sophistical Refutations).
The first three treatises form the core of the logical theory stricto sensu: the grammar of the language of logic and the correct rules of reasoning.
The Rhetoric is not conventionally included, but it states that it relies on the Topics.
What is today called Aristotelian logic with its types of syllogism (methods of logical argument), Aristotle himself would have labelled "analytics".
The term "logic" he reserved to mean dialectics.
Aristotle's Posterior Analytics contains his account of demonstration, or demonstrative knowledge, what would today be considered the study of epistemology rather than logic, but which for Aristotle is deeply connected with his account of syllogism.
For Aristotle, knowledge is that which is necessarily the case, along with the study of causes.
The word "metaphysics" comes from the title of a collection of works by Aristotle bearing that title.
However, Aristotle did not use that term himself, which is due to a later compiler, but instead called it "first philosophy" or theology.
He distinguished this as "the study of being qua being" which, as opposed to other studies of being, such as mathematics and natural science, studies that which is eternal, unchanging, and immaterial.
If there were no other independent things besides the composite natural ones, the study of nature would be the primary kind of knowledge; but if there is some motionless independent thing, the knowledge of this precedes it and is first philosophy, and it is universal in just this way, because it is first.
And it belongs to this sort of philosophy to study being as being, both what it is and what belongs to it just by virtue of being.
Aristotle examines the concepts of substance (ousia) and essence (to ti ên einai, "the what it was to be") in his Metaphysics (Book VII), and he concludes that a particular substance is a combination of both matter and form, a philosophical theory called hylomorphism.
In Book VIII, he distinguishes the matter of the substance as the substratum, or the stuff of which it is composed.
For example, the matter of a house is the bricks, stones, timbers, etc.
The formula that gives the components is the account of the matter, and the formula that gives the differentia is the account of the form.
Like his teacher Plato, Aristotle's philosophy aims at the universal.
Aristotle's ontology has the universal (katholou) exist in a lesser sense than particulars (kath' hekaston), things in the world, whereas for Plato the universal is a realer, separately existing form which particular things merely imitate.
For Aristotle, universals still exist, but are only encountered when "instantiated" in a particular substance.
In addition, Aristotle disagreed with Plato about the location of universals.
Where Plato spoke of the forms as existing separately from the things that participate in them, Aristotle maintained that universals are multiply located.
So, according to Aristotle, the form of apple exists within each apple, rather than in the world of the forms.
Coming-to-be is a change where the substrate of the thing that has undergone the change has itself changed.
In that particular change he introduces the concept of potentiality (dynamis) and actuality (entelecheia) in association with the matter and the form.
Referring to potentiality, this is what a thing is capable of doing or being acted upon if the conditions are right and it is not prevented by something else.
For example, the seed of a plant in the soil is potentially (dynamei) a plant, and if it is not prevented by something, it will become a plant.
Potentially, beings can either 'act' (poiein) or 'be acted upon' (paschein), which can be either innate or learned.
For example, the eyes possess the potentiality of sight (innate – being acted upon), while the capability of playing the flute can be possessed by learning (exercise – acting).
Actuality is the fulfilment of the end of the potentiality.
Because the end (telos) is the principle of every change, and potentiality exists for the sake of the end, actuality, accordingly, is the end.
Referring then to the previous example, it can be said that an actuality is when a plant does one of the activities that plants do.
For that for the sake of which (to hou heneka) a thing is, is its principle, and the becoming is for the sake of the end; and the actuality is the end, and it is for the sake of this that the potentiality is acquired.
For animals do not see in order that they may have sight, but they have sight that they may see.
In summary, the matter used to make a house has potentiality to be a house and both the activity of building and the form of the final house are actualities, which is also a final cause or end.
Then Aristotle proceeds and concludes that the actuality is prior to potentiality in formula, in time and in substantiality.
With this definition of the particular substance (i.
Since, according to Plato there are two Ideas: animal and biped, how then is man a unity?
However, according to Aristotle, the potential being (matter) and the actual one (form) are one and the same.
Aristotle's "natural philosophy" spans a wide range of natural phenomena including those now covered by physics, biology and other natural sciences.
In Aristotle's terminology, "natural philosophy" is a branch of philosophy examining the phenomena of the natural world, and includes fields that would be regarded today as physics, biology and other natural sciences.
Aristotle's work encompassed virtually all facets of intellectual inquiry.
Aristotle makes philosophy in the broad sense coextensive with reasoning, which he also would describe as "science".
However, his use of the term science carries a different meaning than that covered by the term "scientific method".
For Aristotle, "all science (dianoia) is either practical, poetical or theoretical" (Metaphysics 1025b25).
His practical science includes ethics and politics; his poetical science means the study of fine arts including poetry; his theoretical science covers physics, mathematics and metaphysics.
In his On Generation and Corruption, Aristotle related each of the four elements proposed earlier by Empedocles, earth, water, air, and fire, to two of the four sensible qualities, hot, cold, wet, and dry.
In the Empedoclean scheme, all matter was made of the four elements, in differing proportions.
Aristotle's scheme added the heavenly aether, the divine substance of the heavenly spheres, stars and planets.
Aristotle describes two kinds of motion: "violent" or "unnatural motion", such as that of a thrown stone, in the Physics (254b10), and "natural motion", such as of a falling object, in On the Heavens (300a20).
In violent motion, as soon as the agent stops causing it, the motion stops also: in other words, the natural state of an object is to be at rest, since Aristotle does not address friction.
With this understanding, it can be observed that, as Aristotle stated, heavy objects (on the ground, say) require more force to make them move; and objects pushed with greater force move faster.
Natural motion depends on the element concerned: the aether naturally moves in a circle around the heavens, while the 4 Empedoclean elements move vertically up (like fire, as is observed) or down (like earth) towards their natural resting places.
Aristotle implies that in a vacuum the speed of fall would become infinite, and concludes from this apparent absurdity that a vacuum is not possible.
Opinions have varied on whether Aristotle intended to state quantitative laws.
Henri Carteron held the "extreme view" that Aristotle's concept of force was basically qualitative, but other authors reject this.
Archimedes corrected Aristotle's theory that bodies move towards their natural resting places; metal boats can float if they displace enough water; floating depends in Archimedes' scheme on the mass and volume of the object, not, as Aristotle thought, its elementary composition.
Aristotle's writings on motion remained influential until the early modern period.
John Philoponus (in late antiquity) and Galileo (in the early modern period) are said to have shown by experiment that Aristotle's claim that a heavier object falls faster than a lighter object is incorrect.
A contrary opinion is given by Carlo Rovelli, who argues that Aristotle's physics of motion is correct within its domain of validity, that of objects in the Earth's gravitational field immersed in a fluid such as air.
In this system, heavy bodies in steady fall indeed travel faster than light ones (whether friction is ignored, or not), and they do fall more slowly in a denser medium.
Isaac Newton's "forced" motion corresponds to Aristotle's "violent" motion with its external agent, but Aristotle's assumption that the agent's effect stops immediately it stops acting (e.
The material cause describes the material out of which something is composed.
Thus the material cause of a wooden table is the wood it is made of.
The formal cause is its form, i.
The efficient cause is "the primary source", the modern definition of "cause" as either the agent or agency of particular events or states of affairs.
In the case of two dominoes, when the first is knocked over it causes the second to fall.
In the case of an animal, this agency is a combination of how it develops from the egg, and how its body functions.
The final cause (telos) is its purpose, the reason why it exists or is done, or function that something is supposed to serve.
In the case of living things, it implies adaptation to a particular way of life.
Aristotle was aware of Pythagorean optics.
He used optics in his Meteorology, treating it as a science.
He viewed optics as stating the laws of sight, thus combining what is now treated as physics and biology.
The process of seeing involved the movement of a visible form from the thing seen through the air (or other medium) to the eye, where the form comes to rest.
Aristotle does not analyse the nature of this movement; he does not anticipate geometrical optics.
According to Aristotle, spontaneity and chance are causes of some things, distinguishable from other types of cause such as simple necessity.
Chance as an incidental cause lies in the realm of accidental things, "from what is spontaneous".
There is also more a specific kind of chance, which Aristotle names "luck", that only applies to people's moral choices.
In astronomy, Aristotle refuted Democritus's claim that the Milky Way was made up of "those stars which are shaded by the earth from the sun's rays," pointing out partly correctly that if "the size of the sun is greater than that of the earth and the distance of the stars from the earth many times greater than that of the sun, then.
Aristotle was one of the first people to record any geological observations.
He stated that geological change was too slow to be observed in one person's lifetime.
The geologist Charles Lyell noted that Aristotle described such change, including "lakes that had dried up" and "deserts that had become watered by rivers", giving as examples the growth of the Nile delta since the time of Homer, and "the upheaving of one of the Aeolian islands, previous to a volcanic eruption.
Meteorologica lends its name to the modern study of meteorology, but its modern usage diverges from the content of Aristotle's ancient treatise on meteors.
The ancient Greeks did use the term for a range of atmospheric phenomena, but also for earthquakes and volcanic eruptions.
Aristotle proposed that the cause of earthquakes was a gas or vapour (anathymiaseis) that was trapped inside the earth and trying to escape, following other Greek authors Anaxagoras, Empedocles and Democritus.
Aristotle also made many observations about the hydrologic cycle.
For example, he made some of the earliest observations about desalination: he observed early – and correctly – that when seawater is heated, freshwater evaporates and that the oceans are then replenished by the cycle of rainfall and river runoff ("I have proved by experiment that salt water evaporated forms fresh and the vapour does not when it condenses condense into sea water again.
Aristotle was the first person to study biology systematically, and biology forms a large part of his writings.
He spent two years observing and describing the zoology of Lesbos and the surrounding seas, including in particular the Pyrrha lagoon in the centre of Lesbos.
His data in History of Animals, Generation of Animals, Movement of Animals, and Parts of Animals are from his own observations, statements by knowledgeable people such as beekeepers and fishermen, and accounts by travellers.
His apparent emphasis on animals rather than plants is a historical accident: his works on botany have been lost, but two books on plants by his pupil Theophrastus have survived.
Aristotle reports on sea life from observation on Lesbos and the catches of fishermen.
He describes the catfish, electric ray, and frogfish, as well as cephalopods such as the octopus and paper nautilus.
His description of the hectocotyl arm of cephalopods, used in sexual reproduction, was widely disbelieved until the 19th century.
He gives accurate descriptions of the four-chambered stomachs of ruminants, and of the ovoviviparous embryological development of the hound shark.
He notes that an animal's structure is well matched to function so the heron has a long neck, long legs, and a sharp spear-like beak, whereas ducks have short legs and webbed feet.
Darwin, too, noted such differences, but unlike Aristotle used the data to come to the theory of evolution.
Aristotle's writings can seem to imply evolution, but Aristotle saw mutations or hybridizations as rare accidents, distinct from natural causes.
He was thus critical of Empedocles's theory of a "survival of the fittest" origin of living things and their organs, and ridiculed the idea that accidents could lead to orderly results.
In modern terms, he nowhere says that different species can have a common ancestor, that one kind can change into another, or that kinds can become extinct.
Aristotle did not do experiments in the modern sense.
He made observations, or at most investigative procedures like dissection.
In Generation of Animals, he opens a fertilized hen's egg to see the embryo's heart beating inside.
Instead, he systematically gathered data, discovering patterns common to whole groups of animals, and inferring possible causal explanations from these.
This style is common in modern biology when large amounts of data become available in a new field, such as genomics.
This sets out testable hypotheses and constructs a narrative explanation of what is observed.
In this sense, Aristotle's biology is scientific.
From his data, Aristotle inferred rules relating the life-history features of live-bearing tetrapods (terrestrial placental mammals) that he studied.
He correctly predicted that brood size decreases with body mass; that lifespan increases with gestation period and with body mass; and that fecundity decreases with lifespan.
Aristotle distinguished about 500 animal species, arranging them in a nonreligious graded scale of perfection, with man at the top.
The highest gave live birth to hot and wet creatures, the lowest laid cold, dry mineral-like eggs.
He grouped what a zoologist would call vertebrates as "animals with blood", and invertebrates as "animals without blood".
Those with blood were divided into live-bearing (mammals), and egg-laying (birds, reptiles, fish).
Those without blood were insects, crustacea and hard-shelled molluscs.
He recognised that animals did not exactly fit onto a scale, and noted exceptions, such as that sharks had a placenta.
To a biologist, the explanation is convergent evolution.
Philosophers of science have concluded that Aristotle was not interested in taxonomy, but zoologists think otherwise.
Aristotle's psychology, in his treatise On the Soul (peri psychēs), posits three kinds of soul (psyches): the vegetative, sensitive, and rational.
Humans have all three.
The vegetative soul is concerned with growth and nourishment.
The sensitive soul experiences sensations and movement.
The uniquely human, rational soul receives forms of things and compares them using the nous (intellect) and logos (reason).
For Aristotle, the soul is the form of a living being.
Because all beings are composites of form and matter, the form of living beings is that which endows them with what is specific to living beings, e.
In contrast to earlier philosophers, but in accordance with the Egyptians, he placed the rational soul in the heart.
Aristotle distinguished sensation and thought, unlike previous philosophers except for Alcmaeon.
In On the Soul, Aristotle criticizes Plato's theory of the soul and develops his own in response.
Firstly he criticises Plato's Timaeus which holds the soul takes up space and can come into physical contact with bodies.
Aristotle also argued that Plato's view of reincarnation entails that a soul and its body can be mis-matched; in principle, Aristotle alleges, any soul can go with any body, according to Plato's theory.
According to Aristotle in On the Soul, memory is the ability to hold a perceived experience in the mind and to distinguish between the internal "appearance" and a past occurrence.
A memory is a mental picture (phantasm) that can be recovered.
An impression is left on a semi-fluid bodily organ that undergoes changes in order to make a memory.
A memory occurs when stimuli such as sights or sounds are so complex that the nervous system cannot receive them all at once.
These changes are the same as those involved in sensation, 'common sense', and thinking.
Aristotle uses the term 'memory' for the actual retaining of an experience in the impression that develops from sensation, and for the intellectual anxiety that comes with the impression because it is formed at a particular time and processing specific contents.
Memory is of the past, prediction is of the future, and sensation is of the present.
Retrieval of impressions cannot be performed suddenly.
A transitional channel is needed and located in past experiences, both for previous experience and present experience.
Because Aristotle believed people perceive all kinds of sense perceptions as impressions, people continually weave together new impressions of experiences.
To search for impressions, people search memory itself.
Within memory, if an experience is offered instead of a specific memory, that person will reject this experience until they find what they are looking for.
Recollection occurs when a retrieved experience naturally follows another.
If the chain of "images" is needed, one memory stimulates the next.
When people recall experiences, they stimulate certain previous experiences until they reach the one that is needed.
Recollection is thus the self-directed activity of retrieving information stored in a memory impression.
Only humans can remember impressions of intellectual activity, such as numbers and words.
Animals that have perception of time can retrieve memories of their past observations.
Remembering involves only perception of the things remembered and of the time passed.
Aristotle believed the chain of thought that achieves recollection of impressions was connected systematically in relationships such as similarity, contrast, and contiguity, described in his laws of association.
Aristotle believed that past experiences are hidden within the mind.
A force operates to awaken the hidden material to bring up the actual experience.
Association is the power innate in a mental state, which operates upon the unexpressed remains of former experiences, allowing them to be recalled.
Aristotle describes sleep in On Sleep and Wakefulness.
It is a result of overuse of the senses or of digestion, and is vital to the body.
While a person is asleep, the critical activities, which include thinking, sensing, recalling and remembering, do not function.
Since a person cannot sense during sleep, they cannot have desire.
However, the senses work during sleep, albeit differently.
Dreams do not involve sensing a stimulus.
Sensation is involved, but in an altered manner.
Aristotle explains that when a person stares at a moving stimulus such as the waves in a body of water, and then looks away, the next thing they look at appears to have a wavelike motion.
When a person perceives a stimulus and it is no longer the focus of their attention, it leaves an impression.
When the body is awake, a person constantly encounters new stimuli and so the impressions of previous stimuli are ignored.
However, during sleep the impressions made throughout the day are noticed, free of distractions.
So, dreams result from these lasting impressions.
Since impressions are all that are left, dreams do not resemble waking experience.
During sleep, a person is in an altered state of mind, like a person who is overtaken by strong feelings.
For example, a person who has a strong infatuation with someone may begin to think they see that person everywhere.
Since a person sleeping is in a suggestible state and unable to make judgements, they become easily deceived by what appears in their dreams, like the infatuated person.
This leads them to believe the dream is real, even when the dreams are absurd.
In De Anima iii 3, Aristotle ascribes the ability to create, to store, and to recall images to the faculty of imagination, phantasia.
One component of Aristotle's theory disagrees with previously held beliefs.
He claimed that dreams are not foretelling and not sent by a divine being.
Aristotle reasoned that instances in which dreams resemble future events are simply coincidences.
Any sensory experience perceived while a person is asleep, such as actually hearing a door close, does not qualify as part of a dream.
Images of dreams must be a result of lasting impressions of waking sensory experiences.
Aristotle's practical philosophy covers areas such as ethics, politics, economics, and rhetoric.
Aristotle was a virtue ethicist who considered ethics to be a practical rather than theoretical study, i.
He wrote several treatises on ethics, most notably including the Nicomachean Ethics.
Aristotle taught that virtue has to do with the proper function (ergon) of a thing.
An eye is only a good eye in so much as it can see because the proper function of an eye is sight.
Aristotle reasoned that humans must have a function specific to humans, and that this function must be an activity of the psuchē (soul) in accordance with reason (logos).
Aristotle identified such an optimum activity (the virtuous mean, between the accompanying vices of excess or deficiency) of the soul as the aim of all human deliberate action, eudaimonia, generally translated as "happiness" or sometimes "well-being".
To have the potential of ever being happy in this way necessarily requires a good character (ēthikē aretē), often translated as moral or ethical virtue or excellence.
Aristotle taught that to achieve a virtuous and potentially happy character requires a first stage of having the fortune to be habituated, not deliberately, but by teachers, and experience, leading to a later stage in which one consciously chooses to do the best things, becoming the phronimos or virtuous man.
When the best people come to live life this way their practical wisdom (phronesis) and their intellect (nous) can develop with each other towards the highest possible human virtue, the wisdom of an accomplished theoretical or speculative thinker, or in other words, a philosopher.
In addition to his works on ethics, which address the individual, Aristotle addressed the city in his work titled Politics.
Aristotle considered the city to be a natural community.
Moreover, he considered the city to be prior in importance to the family, which in turn is prior to the individual, "for the whole must of necessity be prior to the part".
He famously stated that "man is by nature a political animal" and argued that humanity's defining factor among others in the animal kingdom is its rationality.
Aristotle conceived of politics as being like an organism rather than like a machine, and as a collection of parts, none of which can exist without the others.
Aristotle's conception of the city is organic, and he is considered one of the first to conceive of the city in this manner.
The common modern understanding of a political community as a modern state is quite different from Aristotle's understanding.
Although he was aware of the existence and potential of larger empires, the natural community according to Aristotle was the city (polis) which functions as a political "community" or "partnership" (koinōnia).
The aim of the city is not just to avoid injustice or for economic stability, but rather to allow at least some citizens the possibility to live a good life, and to perform beautiful acts: "The political partnership must be regarded, therefore, as being for the sake of noble actions, not for the sake of living together.
For we all agree that the most excellent man should rule, i.
And again, what standard do we have, what criterion of good things, that is more precise than the intelligent man?
For all that this man will choose, if the choice is based on his knowledge, are good things and their contraries are bad.
And since everybody chooses most of all what conforms to their own proper dispositions (a just man choosing to live justly, a man with bravery to live bravely, likewise a self-controlled man to live with self-control), it is clear that the intelligent man will choose most of all to be intelligent; for this is the function of that capacity.
Hence it's evident that, according to the most authoritative judgment, intelligence is supreme among goods.
This then is the mode of the mixture; and the mark of a good mixture of democracy and oligarchy is when it is possible to speak of the same constitution as a democracy and as an oligarchy.
Aristotle made substantial contributions to economic thought, especially to thought in the Middle Ages.
In Politics, Aristotle addresses the city, property, and trade.
His response to criticisms of private property, in Lionel Robbins's view, anticipated later proponents of private property among philosophers and economists, as it related to the overall utility of social arrangements.
Aristotle believed that although communal arrangements may seem beneficial to society, and that although private property is often blamed for social strife, such evils in fact come from human nature.
In Politics, Aristotle offers one of the earliest accounts of the origin of money.
Money came into use because people became dependent on one another, importing what they needed and exporting the surplus.
For the sake of convenience, people then agreed to deal in something that is intrinsically useful and easily applicable, such as iron or silver.
Aristotle's discussions on retail and interest was a major influence on economic thought in the Middle Ages.
He had a low opinion of retail, believing that contrary to using money to procure things one needs in managing the household, retail trade seeks to make a profit.
It thus uses goods as a means to an end, rather than as an end unto itself.
He believed that retail trade was in this way unnatural.
Similarly, Aristotle considered making a profit through interest unnatural, as it makes a gain out of the money itself, and not from its use.
Aristotle gave a summary of the function of money that was perhaps remarkably precocious for his time.
He wrote that because it is impossible to determine the value of every good through a count of the number of other goods it is worth, the necessity arises of a single universal standard of measurement.
Money thus allows for the association of different goods and makes them "commensurable".
He goes on to state that money is also useful for future exchange, making it a sort of security.
That is, "if we do not want a thing now, we shall be able to get it when we do want it".
Aristotle's Rhetoric proposes that a speaker can use three basic kinds of appeals to persuade his audience: ethos (an appeal to the speaker's character), pathos (an appeal to the audience's emotion), and logos (an appeal to logical reasoning).
He also categorizes rhetoric into three genres: epideictic (ceremonial speeches dealing with praise or blame), forensic (judicial speeches over guilt or innocence), and deliberative (speeches calling on an audience to decide on an issue).
Aristotle also outlines two kinds of rhetorical proofs: enthymeme (proof by syllogism) and paradeigma (proof by example).
Aristotle writes in his Poetics that epic poetry, tragedy, comedy, dithyrambic poetry, painting, sculpture, music, and dance are all fundamentally acts of mimesis ("imitation"), each varying in imitation by medium, object, and manner.
He applies the term mimesis both as a property of a work of art and also as the product of the artist's intention and contends that the audience's realisation of the mimesis is vital to understanding the work itself.
Aristotle states that mimesis is a natural instinct of humanity that separates humans from animals and that all human artistry "follows the pattern of nature".
Because of this, Aristotle believed that each of the mimetic arts possesses what Stephen Halliwell calls "highly structured procedures for the achievement of their purposes.
The forms also differ in their object of imitation.
Comedy, for instance, is a dramatic imitation of men worse than average; whereas tragedy imitates men slightly better than average.
Lastly, the forms differ in their manner of imitation – through narrative or character, through change or no change, and through drama or no drama.
While it is believed that Aristotle's Poetics originally comprised two books – one on comedy and one on tragedy – only the portion that focuses on tragedy has survived.
Aristotle taught that tragedy is composed of six elements: plot-structure, character, style, thought, spectacle, and lyric poetry.
The characters in a tragedy are merely a means of driving the story; and the plot, not the characters, is the chief focus of tragedy.
Tragedy is the imitation of action arousing pity and fear, and is meant to effect the catharsis of those same emotions.
Aristotle concludes Poetics with a discussion on which, if either, is superior: epic or tragic mimesis.
He suggests that because tragedy possesses all the attributes of an epic, possibly possesses additional attributes such as spectacle and music, is more unified, and achieves the aim of its mimesis in shorter scope, it can be considered superior to epic.
Aristotle was a keen systematic collector of riddles, folklore, and proverbs; he and his school had a special interest in the riddles of the Delphic Oracle and studied the fables of Aesop.
More than 2300 years after his death, Aristotle remains one of the most influential people who ever lived.
He contributed to almost every field of human knowledge then in existence, and was the founder of many new fields.
According to the philosopher Bryan Magee, "it is doubtful whether any human being has ever known as much as he did".
Aristotle has been regarded as the first scientist.
Aristotle was the founder of term logic, pioneered the study of zoology, and benefited future scientists and philosophers through his contributions to the scientific method.
Taneli Kukkonen, observes that his achievement in founding two sciences is unmatched, and his reach in influencing "every branch of intellectual enterprise" including Western ethical and political theory, theology, rhetoric, and literary analysis is equally long.
As a result, Kukkonen argues, any analysis of reality today "will almost certainly carry Aristotelian overtones .
Aristotle has been called the father of logic, biology, political science, zoology, embryology, natural law, scientific method, rhetoric, psychology, realism, criticism, individualism, teleology, and meteorology.
What follows is an overview of the transmission and influence of his texts and ideas into the modern era.
The immediate influence of Aristotle's work was felt as the Lyceum grew into the Peripatetic school.
Aristotle's students included Aristoxenus, Dicaearchus, Demetrius of Phalerum, Eudemos of Rhodes, Harpalus, Hephaestion, Mnason of Phocis, Nicomachus, and Theophrastus.
Aristotle's pupil and successor, Theophrastus, wrote the History of Plants, a pioneering work in botany.
Some of his technical terms remain in use, such as carpel from carpos, fruit, and pericarp, from pericarpion, seed chamber.
Theophrastus was much less concerned with formal causes than Aristotle was, instead pragmatically describing how plants functioned.
Under the Ptolemies, the first medical teacher at Alexandria, Herophilus of Chalcedon, corrected Aristotle, placing intelligence in the brain, and connected the nervous system to motion and sensation.
Herophilus also distinguished between veins and arteries, noting that the latter pulse while the former do not.
In antiquity, Aristotle's writings were divisible into two groups; the "exoteric" works, intended for the public, and the "esoteric" treatises, for use within the Lyceum school.
However, all of the works of Aristotle that have survived from antiquity through medieval manuscript transmission are the technical philosophical treatises from within Aristotle's school, which were compiled in the 1st century BC by Andronicus of Rhodes out of a series of smaller, separate works into the more cohesive, larger works as they are known today.
The primary way that ancient philosophers in the Roman empire engaged with Aristotle's technical work was via philosophical commentary; interpretation and explication of the text of Aristotle along with their own synthesis and views on the topics discussed by Aristotle.
The peripatetic commentary tradition began with Boethus of Sidon in the 1st century BC and reached its peak at the end of the 2nd century AD with Alexander of Aphrodisias, who was appointed to the official Imperial chair of Aristotelian philosophy established by Marcus Aurelius, many of whose commentaries still survive.
In the 3rd century, Neoplatonism emerged as the dominant philosophical school.
The Neoplatonists saw all subsequent philosophical systems after Plato, including Aristotle's, as developments on Plato's philosophy, and sought to explain how Plato and Aristotle were in agreement, even on subjects where they appeared to disagree, and included Aristotle's logical and physical works in their school curriculum as introductory works that needed to be mastered before the study of Plato himself.
This study program began with the Categories, which the Neoplatonist philosopher Porphyry of Tyre wrote an introduction to, called Isagoge, which went on to influence subsequent philosophy in late antiquity and the medieval period.
Later Neoplatonists in Athens and Alexandria including Syrianus, Ammonius Hermiae, Olympiodorus the Younger and Simplicius of Cilicia wrote further commentaries on Aristotle from a Platonist perspective which are still extant, with Simplicius compiling many of the lost works of his predecessors into massive commentaries that survey the entire Neoplatonic tradition.
With the rise of Christianity and closure of the pagan schools by the order of Justinian in 529, the study of Aristotle and other philosophers in the remainder of the Byzantine period was primarily from a Christian perspective.
The first Byzantine Christians to comment extensively on Aristotle were Philoponus, who was a student of Ammonius, and Elias and David, students of Olympiodorus, along with Stephen of Alexandria in the early seventh century, who brought the study of Plato and Aristotle from Alexandria to Constantinople.
John Philoponus stands out for having attempted a fundamental critique of Aristotle's views on the eternity of the world, movement, and other elements of Aristotelian thought.
Philoponus questioned Aristotle's teaching of physics, noting its flaws and introducing the theory of impetus to explain his observations.
After a hiatus of several centuries, formal commentary by Eustratius and Michael of Ephesus reappeared in the late eleventh and early twelfth centuries, apparently sponsored by Anna Comnena.
Byzantine philosophers also filled in the gaps in the commentaries that had survived down to their time; Alexander of Aphrodisias' commentary on the Metaphysics, of which only the first five books survived, was completed by Michael of Ephesus, who also wrote a commentary on the Sophistical Refutations, the only work of the Organon not to have a commentary, and Michael of Ephesus and Eustratius compiled a number of fragmentary commentaries on the Nicomachean Ethics which they supplemented with their own interpretations.
Michael of Ephesus wrote commentaries on the works of Aristotle's animal biology and the Politics, completing the series of commentaries on Aristotle's extant works.
Aristotle's works also underwent a revival in the Abbasid Caliphate.
Translated into Arabic, Aristotle's logic, ethics, and natural philosophy inspired early Islamic scholars.
Aristotle is considered the most influential figure in the history of Arabic philosophy and was revered in early Islamic theology.
Most surviving works of Aristotle, as well as some of the original Greek commentaries, were translated into Arabic and studied by Muslim philosophers, scientists, and scholars.
Through commentaries and critical engagements, figures like Al-Kindi, Al-Farabi, Ibn Sina (Avicenna), and Averroes breathed new life into Aristotle's ideas.
They harmonized his logic with Islamic theology, employed his scientific methodology to explore the natural world, and reinterpreted his ethics within the framework of Islamic morality.
Islamic thinkers embraced Aristotle's rigorous methods while challenging his conclusions where they diverged from their religious beliefs, which later influenced Thomas Aquinas and other Western Christian scholastic philosophers.
Medieval Muslim scholars described Aristotle as the "First Teacher".
The title was later used by Western philosophers (as in Dante's poem) who were influenced by the tradition of Islamic philosophy.
Moses Maimonides (considered to be the foremost intellectual figure of medieval Judaism) adopted Aristotelianism from the Islamic scholars and based his Guide for the Perplexed on it; the work became the basis of Jewish scholastic philosophy.
Maimonides also considered Aristotle to be the greatest philosopher that ever lived, and styled him as the "chief of the philosophers".
Also, in his letter to Samuel ibn Tibbon, Maimonides observes that there is no need for Samuel to study the writings of philosophers who preceded Aristotle because the works of the latter are "sufficient by themselves and [superior] to all that were written before them.
His intellect, Aristotle's is the extreme limit of human intellect, apart from him upon whom the divine emanation has flowed forth to such an extent that they reach the level of prophecy, there being no level higher".
With the loss of the study of ancient Greek in the early medieval Latin West, Aristotle was practically unknown there from c.
In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, interest in Aristotle revived and Latin Christians had translations made, both from Arabic translations, such as those by Gerard of Cremona, and from the original Greek, such as those by James of Venice and William of Moerbeke.
After the scholastic Thomas Aquinas wrote his Summa Theologica, working from Moerbeke's translations and calling Aristotle "The Philosopher", the demand for Aristotle's writings grew, and the Greek manuscripts returned to the West, stimulating a revival of Aristotelianism in Europe that continued into the Renaissance.
These thinkers blended Aristotelian philosophy with Christianity, bringing the thought of Ancient Greece into the Middle Ages.
Scholars such as Boethius, Peter Abelard, and John Buridan worked on Aristotelian logic.
According to scholar Roger Theodore Lafferty, Dante built up the philosophy of the Comedy on a foundation of Aristotle, just as the scholastics used Aristotle as the basis for their thinking.
Dante knew Aristotle directly from Latin translations of his works and indirectly through quotations in the works of Albert Magnus.
Dante acknowledges Aristotle's influence explicitly in the poem, when Virgil justifies the Inferno's structure by citing the Nicomachean Ethics.
Dante refers to him as "he / Who is acknowledged Master of those who know".
In the early modern period, scientists such as William Harvey in England and Galileo Galilei in Italy reacted against the theories of Aristotle and other classical era thinkers like Galen, establishing new theories based to some degree on observation and experiment.
Harvey demonstrated the circulation of the blood, establishing that the heart functioned as a pump rather than being the seat of the soul and the controller of the body's heat, as Aristotle thought.
Galileo used more doubtful arguments to displace Aristotle's physics, proposing that bodies all fall at the same speed whatever their weight.
The English mathematician George Boole fully accepted Aristotle's logic, but decided "to go under, over, and beyond" it with his system of algebraic logic in his 1854 book The Laws of Thought.
This gives logic a mathematical foundation with equations, enables it to solve equations as well as check validity, and allows it to handle a wider class of problems by expanding propositions of any number of terms, not just two.
Charles Darwin regarded Aristotle as the most important contributor to the subject of biology.
In an 1882 letter he wrote that "Linnaeus and Cuvier have been my two gods, though in very different ways, but they were mere schoolboys to old Aristotle".
Also, in later editions of the book "On the Origin of Species', Darwin traced evolutionary ideas as far back as Aristotle; the text he cites is a summary by Aristotle of the ideas of the earlier Greek philosopher Empedocles.
The philosopher Bertrand Russell claimed that "almost every serious intellectual advance has had to begin with an attack on some Aristotelian doctrine".
Russell called Aristotle's ethics "repulsive", and labelled his logic "as definitely antiquated as Ptolemaic astronomy".
Russell stated that these errors make it difficult to do historical justice to Aristotle, until one remembers what an advance he made upon all of his predecessors.
The Dutch historian of science Eduard Jan Dijksterhuis writes that Aristotle and his predecessors showed the difficulty of science by "proceed[ing] so readily to frame a theory of such a general character" on limited evidence from their senses.
In 1985, the biologist Peter Medawar could still state in "pure seventeenth century" tones that Aristotle had assembled "a strange and generally speaking rather tiresome farrago of hearsay, imperfect observation, wishful thinking and credulity amounting to downright gullibility".
Zoologists have frequently mocked Aristotle for errors and unverified secondhand reports.
However, modern observation has confirmed several of his more surprising claims.
Aristotle's work remains largely unknown to modern scientists, though zoologists sometimes mention him as the father of biology or in particular of marine biology.
Practising zoologists are unlikely to adhere to Aristotle's chain of being, but its influence is still perceptible in the use of the terms "lower" and "upper" to designate taxa such as groups of plants.
The evolutionary biologist Armand Marie Leroi has reconstructed Aristotle's biology, while Niko Tinbergen's four questions, based on Aristotle's four causes, are used to analyse animal behaviour; they examine function, phylogeny, mechanism, and ontogeny.
The concept of homology began with Aristotle; the evolutionary developmental biologist Lewis I.
Held commented that he would be interested in the concept of deep homology.
In systematics too, recent studies consider that Aristotle made important contributions to taxonomy and biological nomenclature.
Aristotle has been depicted by major artists including Lucas Cranach the Elder, Justus van Gent, Raphael, Paolo Veronese, Jusepe de Ribera, Rembrandt, and Francesco Hayez over the centuries.
Among the best-known depictions is Raphael's fresco The School of Athens, in the Vatican's Apostolic Palace, where the figures of Plato and Aristotle are central to the image, at the architectural vanishing point, reflecting their importance.
Rembrandt's Aristotle with a Bust of Homer, too, is a celebrated work, showing the knowing philosopher and the blind Homer from an earlier age: as the art critic Jonathan Jones writes, "this painting will remain one of the greatest and most mysterious in the world, ensnaring us in its musty, glowing, pitch-black, terrible knowledge of time.
The Aristotle Mountains in Antarctica are named after Aristotle.
He was the first person known to conjecture, in his book Meteorology, the existence of a landmass in the southern high-latitude region, which he called Antarctica.
Aristoteles is a crater on the Moon bearing the classical form of Aristotle's name.
The secondary literature on Aristotle is vast.
The following is only a small selection.
Turner, William (1907).
Catholic Encyclopedia.
Lives of the Eminent Philosophers.
Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.
Loeb Classical Library.
Plato ( PLAY-toe; Ancient Greek: Πλάτων, Plátōn; born c.
An innovator of the literary dialogue and dialectic forms, Plato influenced all the major areas of theoretical philosophy and practical philosophy, and was the founder of the Academy, a philosophical school in Athens where Plato taught the collection of philosophical theories that would later become known as Platonism.
Plato's most famous contribution is his Theory of Forms (or Ideas), which aims to solve what is now known as the problem of universals.
He was influenced by the pre-Socratic thinkers Pythagoras, Heraclitus, and Parmenides, although much of what is known about them is derived from Plato himself.
Along with his teacher Socrates, and his student Aristotle, Plato is a central figure in the history of Western philosophy.
Plato's complete works are believed to have survived for over 2,400 years—unlike that of nearly all of his contemporaries.
Although their popularity has fluctuated, they have consistently been read and studied through the ages.
Through Platonism's outgrowth Neoplatonism, he also influenced Christian, Jewish and Islamic philosophy.
In modern times, Alfred North Whitehead said: "the safest general characterization of the European philosophical tradition is that it consists of a series of footnotes to Plato.
Plato was born between 428 and 423 BC into an aristocratic and influential Athenian family; through his mother, Perictione, he was a descendant of Solon, a statesman credited with laying the foundations of Athenian democracy.
Diogenes Laertius asserts that Plato is a nickname that alludes to his robust figure, and that his birth name was Aristocles (Ἀριστοκλῆς), meaning 'best reputation', but this is widely regarded as false by modern scholarship.
Plato had two brothers, Glaucon and Adeimantus, both of whom appear in the Republic, and also a sister, Potone, and a half brother, Antiphon.
During Plato's childhood, Athens was involved in the Peloponnesian War against Sparta.
His older brothers, Adeimantus and Glaucon, distinguished themselves at the battle of Megara in 409 BC.
Despite the war, Plato and his brothers, like all male citizens of Athens, received a traditional education in gymnastics and music.
According to the ancient writers, there was a tradition that Plato's favorite employment in his youthful years was poetry: he wrote poems, dithyrambs at first, and afterwards lyric poems and tragedies (a tetralogy), but abandoned his early passion and burnt his poems when he met Socrates and turned to philosophy.
There are also some epigrams attributed to Plato, but these are now thought by some scholars to be spurious.
In his youth, Plato first encountered Socrates, who would become his teacher and greatest source of inspiration, initially in the company of other Athenian boys in the Palaestra, such as is depicted with Lysis and Menexenus, who discuss philosophy with Socrates in the Lysis, but he soon would become a member of Socrates' inner circle, meeting with Socrates and his other followers.
Socrates, along with the sophists of his day, challenged the prevailing focus of Early Greek philosophy on Natural philosophy, and investigated questions of ethics and politics, examining the ideas of his interlocutors with a series of questioning called the Socratic method.
Socrates' immense influence on Plato is clearly borne out in Plato's dialogues: Plato never speaks in his own voice in his dialogues; every dialogue except the Laws features Socrates, although many dialogues, including the Timaeus and Statesman, feature him speaking only rarely.
Leo Strauss notes that Socrates' reputation for irony casts doubt on whether Plato's Socrates is expressing sincere beliefs.
Xenophon's Memorabilia and Aristophanes's The Clouds seem to present a somewhat different portrait of Socrates from the one Plato paints.
Aristotle attributes a different doctrine with respect to Forms to Plato and Socrates.
Aristotle suggests that Socrates' idea of forms can be discovered through investigation of the natural world, unlike Plato's Forms that exist beyond and outside the ordinary range of human understanding.
The Socratic problem concerns how to reconcile these various accounts.
The precise relationship between Plato and Socrates remains an area of contention among scholars.
According to the Seventh Letter, whose authenticity has been disputed, as Plato came of age, he imagined for himself a life in public affairs.
In 404, Sparta defeated Athens at the conclusion of the Peloponessian war, leading to the election of the Thirty Tyrants, which included two of Plato's relatives, Critias and Charmides.
Plato himself was invited to join the administration, but declined, and quickly became disillusioned by the atrocities committed by the Thirty, especially when they tried to implicate Socrates in their seizure of the democratic general Leon of Salamis for summary execution.
In 403 BC, the democracy was restored after the regrouping of the democrats in exile, who entered the city through the Piraeus and met the forces of the Thirty at the Battle of Munychia, where both Critias and Charmides were killed.
In 401 BC, the restored democrats raided Eleusis and killed the remaining oligarchic supporters, suspecting them of hiring mercenaries.
As depicted in the many dialogues that are set between 401 and 399 BC, life largely returned to normal in Athens.
However, the prosecution of Socrates by Anytus put an end to Plato's plans for a political career.
After the death of Socrates, Plato remained in Athens for roughly three years.
In Athens, Plato studied with Cratylus, a philosopher who followed the early Greek philosopher Heraclitus, and also Hermogenes, an Eleatic philosopher in the tradition of Parmenides.
Heraclitus viewed all things as continuously changing, that one cannot "step into the same river twice" due to the ever-changing waters flowing through it, and all things exist as a contraposition of opposites, while Parmenides adopted an altogether contrary vision, arguing for the idea of a changeless, eternal universe and the view that change is an illusion.
Heraclitus's views are expounded by Cratylus himself in Plato's dialogue Cratylus and deconstructed in the Theaetetus by Socrates.
Plato would go on to depict both Parmenides and Parmenides' student Zeno in the Parmenides, and an "Eleatic Stranger" also appears in the Sophist and Statesman.
In roughly 396 BC, Plato left Athens and studied in Megara with Euclid of Megara, founder of the Megarian school of philosophy, and other Socratics.
Around 394 BC or earlier, he returned to Athens, where, as an Athenian male of military age he would have needed to be available to serve in the Corinthian war, which Athens participated in from 395 to 386 BC.
Other than potential military service, Plato spent his time studying mathematics with Archytas of Tarentum, Theaetetus, Leodamas of Thasos, and Neocleides in the grove of Hecademus, named after an Attic hero in Greek mythology, northwest of the city of Athens, where he would later found his Academy.
During this time, Plato likely began work on some of his earliest works; including the Apology, possibly early drafts of the Gorgias and Republic Book I, and an early form of the Republic books II-IV, in the form of a speech rather than a dialogue, which was ridiculed by Aristophanes in the Ecclesiazusae in 391 BC.
Speusippus, the son of Plato's sister Potone, who took over the academy after Plato's death, joined the group in about 390 BC, and Eudoxus of Cnidus, another early mathematician, arrived around 385 BC.
After the conclusion of the Corinthian War, Plato travelled to southern Italy to study with Archytas and other Pythagoreans.
The influence of these Pythagoreans appears to have been significant.
The platonic Republic might be related to the idea of "a tightly organized community of like-minded thinkers", like the one established by Pythagoras in Croton.
The idea that mathematics and, generally speaking, abstract thinking is a secure basis for philosophical thinking as well as "for substantial theses in science and morals".
They shared a "mystical approach to the soul and its place in the material world".
Pythagoras held that all things are number, and the cosmos comes from numerical principles.
He introduced the concept of form as distinct from matter, and that the physical world is an imitation of an eternal mathematical world.
When Plato was about 40 years old, he visited Syracuse.
Many ancient sources, including the collection of Letters attributed to Plato, tell how he became entangled with the politics of the city of Syracuse.
Plato initially visited Syracuse while it was under the rule of Dionysius, in roughly 385 BC.
During this first trip Dionysius's brother-in-law, Dion of Syracuse, became one of Plato's disciples, but the tyrant himself turned against Plato.
After his return from Syracuse, Plato founded his philosophical school, the Academy, near the sacred olive grove of Hecademus, in roughly 383 BC.
At first, the property consisted of only a house with a garden, and during his lifetime, the work of the Academy itself likely took part in an open area for study of philosophy and mathematics.
From 383 BC until about 366 BC, Plato primarily spent his time at the Academy, writing the majority of the dialogues during this time.
Much like Socrates and his students had been parodied in Aristophanes' plays The Clouds and The Birds, the students at the Academy seem to have been the target of their contemporaries in Middle Comedy.
A fragment from a lost play of Epicrates depicts two students of the Academy engaged in a fierce debate over the genus of a pumpkin, in a parody of the Platonic conception of diairesis.
Aristotle of Stagira, who would go on to become a philosopher as famous as Plato in his own right, arrived in 367 BC, shortly before Plato departed again for Syracuse.
After Dionysius I's death in 367 BC, Plato returned to Syracuse, likely early in 366 BC, at the request of Dion, in order to tutor Dionysius II and guide him to become a philosopher king.
Dionysius II seemed to accept Plato's teachings, but he became suspicious of Dion, his uncle.
Dionysius expelled Dion, and Plato, after trying repeatedly to reconcile the two, gave up and returned to Athens.
Plato returned to Syracuse a third time in 361 BC, likely staying over the winter until 360 BC.
Dionysius kept Plato against his will, forcing Plato to appeal to his friend Archytas to intercede, at which point he returned to Athens.
Dion would return to overthrow Dionysius and ruled Syracuse for a short time from 357 BC up until 354 BC, when he was usurped by Calippus, an Athenian who Plato insists, in the Seventh Letter, had no connection with the Academy.
After 360 BC, Plato returned to Athens, where he spent the remainder of his life.
At this point, he wrote or revised some of his final works, possibly including the Timaeus, Critias, Sophist, Statesman, Philebus, and his longest work, the Laws, all of which exhibit similarity of language, philosophical themes, and style that indicate they were intentionally published together to present a unified viewpoint.
At the time of his death, however, the Laws was still unfinished; this work was edited by a student at the Academy, Philip of Opus, who is also generally believed to have written the Epinomis, an appendix to the Laws.
In 348/347 BC, Plato died and was buried in his garden in the Academy in Athens.
At the time of his death, Plato seems to have been self-sufficient, but not wealthy.
A will preserved by one of the ancient biographers of Plato, which discusses his estate, does not mention the Academy, which suggests that he left a separate provision for it or possibly established an endowment.
He was succeeded as the head of the Academy by Speusippus, his nephew.
In Plato's dialogues, Socrates and his company of disputants had something to say on many subjects, including several aspects of metaphysics.
These include religion and science, human nature, love, and sexuality.
More than one dialogue contrasts perception and reality, nature and custom, and body and soul.
Francis Cornford identified the "twin pillars of Platonism" as the theory of Forms, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, the doctrine of immortality of the soul.
In the dialogues Socrates regularly asks for the meaning of a general term (e.
According to this theory of Forms, there are these two kinds of things: the apparent world of material objects grasped by the senses, which constantly changes, and an unchanging and unseen world of Forms, grasped by reason.
Plato's Forms represent types of things, as well as properties, patterns, and relations, which are referred to as objects.
Just as individual tables, chairs, and cars refer to objects in this world, 'tableness', 'chairness', and 'carness', as well as e.
One of Plato's most cited examples for the Forms were the truths of geometry, such as the Pythagorean theorem.
The theory of Forms is first introduced in the Phaedo dialogue (also known as On the Soul), wherein Socrates disputes the pluralism of Anaxagoras, then the most popular response to Heraclitus and Parmenides.
For Plato, as was characteristic of ancient Greek philosophy, the soul was that which gave life.
Plato advocates a belief in the immortality of the soul, and several dialogues end with long speeches imagining the afterlife.
In the Republic (IV), the soul consists of three parts, which are located in different regions of the body.
Also in the Timaeus, Socrates locates the parts of the soul within the human body: Reason is located in the head, spirit in the top third of the torso, and the appetite in the middle third of the torso, down to the navel.
Furthermore, Plato evinces a belief in the theory of reincarnation in multiple dialogues (such as the Phaedo and Timaeus).
Scholars debate whether he intends the theory to be literally true, however.
He uses this idea of reincarnation to introduce the concept that knowledge is a matter of recollection of things acquainted with before one is born, and not of observation or study.
Keeping with the theme of admitting his own ignorance, Socrates regularly complains of his forgetfulness.
In the Meno, Socrates uses a geometrical example to expound Plato's view that knowledge in this latter sense is acquired by recollection.
Socrates elicits a fact concerning a geometrical construction from a slave boy, who could not have otherwise known the fact (due to the slave boy's lack of education).
The knowledge must be of, Socrates concludes, an eternal, non-perceptible Form.
Plato also discusses several aspects of epistemology.
In several dialogues, Socrates inverts the common man's intuition about what is knowable and what is real.
Reality is unavailable to those who use their senses.
Socrates says that he who sees with his eyes is blind.
While most people take the objects of their senses to be real if anything is, Socrates is contemptuous of people who think that something has to be graspable in the hands to be real.
In other words, such people are willingly ignorant, living without divine inspiration and access to higher insights about reality.
Although Plato has occasionally been presented as having been the first to write that knowledge is justified true belief in the Theaetetus, Plato also identified problems with this same justified true belief definition in that same work, concluding that justification (or an "account") would require knowledge of difference, meaning that the definition of knowledge is circular.
In the Sophist, Statesman, Republic, Timaeus, and the Parmenides, Plato associates knowledge with the apprehension of unchanging Forms and their relationships to one another (which he calls "expertise" in dialectic), including through the processes of collection and division.
More explicitly, Plato himself argues in the Timaeus that knowledge is always proportionate to the realm from which it is gained.
In other words, if one derives one's account of something experientially, because the world of sense is in flux, the views therein attained will be mere opinions.
Meanwhile, opinions are characterized by a lack of necessity and stability.
On the other hand, if one derives one's account of something by way of the non-sensible Forms, because these Forms are unchanging, so too is the account derived from them.
That apprehension of Forms is required for knowledge may be taken to cohere with Plato's theory in the Theaetetus and Meno.
Indeed, the apprehension of Forms may be at the base of the account required for justification, in that it offers foundational knowledge which itself needs no account, thereby avoiding an infinite regression.
Several dialogues discuss ethics including virtue and vice, pleasure and pain, crime and punishment, and justice and medicine.
Socrates presents the famous Euthyphro dilemma in the dialogue of the same name: "Is the pious (τὸ ὅσιον) loved by the gods because it is pious, or is it pious because it is loved by the gods?
In the Republic, Plato poses the question, "What is justice?
Plato views "The Good" as the supreme Form, somehow existing even "beyond being".
In this manner, justice is obtained when knowledge of how to fulfill one's moral and political function in society is put into practice.
The dialogues also discuss politics.
Some of Plato's most famous doctrines are contained in the Republic as well as in the Laws and the Statesman.
Because these opinions are not spoken directly by Plato and vary between dialogues, they cannot be straightforwardly assumed as representing Plato's own views.
Socrates asserts that societies have a tripartite class structure corresponding to the appetite/spirit/reason structure of the individual soul.
The appetite/spirit/reason are analogous to the castes of society.
Productive (Workers) – the labourers, carpenters, plumbers, masons, merchants, farmers, ranchers, etc.
These correspond to the "appetite" part of the soul.
Protective (Warriors or Guardians) – those who are adventurous, strong and brave; in the armed forces.
These correspond to the "spirit" part of the soul.
Governing (Rulers or Philosopher Kings) – those who are intelligent, rational, self-controlled, in love with wisdom, well suited to make decisions for the community.
These correspond to the "reason" part of the soul and are very few.
According to Socrates, a state made up of different kinds of souls will, overall, decline from an aristocracy (rule by the best) to a timocracy (rule by the honourable), then to an oligarchy (rule by the few), then to a democracy (rule by the people), and finally to tyranny (rule by one person, rule by a tyrant).
Several dialogues tackle questions about art, including rhetoric and rhapsody.
Socrates says that poetry is inspired by the muses, and is not rational.
He speaks approvingly of this, and other forms of divine madness (drunkenness, eroticism, and dreaming) in the Phaedrus, and yet in the Republic wants to outlaw Homer's great poetry, and laughter as well.
Scholars often view Plato's philosophy as at odds with rhetoric due to his criticisms of rhetoric in the Gorgias and his ambivalence toward rhetoric expressed in the Phaedrus.
But other contemporary researchers contest the idea that Plato despised rhetoric and instead view his dialogues as a dramatization of complex rhetorical principles.
Plato made abundant use of mythological narratives in his own work; it is generally agreed that the main purpose for Plato in using myths was didactic.
He considered that only a few people were capable or interested in following a reasoned philosophical discourse, but men in general are attracted by stories and tales.
Consequently, then, he used the myth to convey the conclusions of the philosophical reasoning.
Notable examples include the story of Atlantis, the Myth of Er, and the Allegory of the Cave.
According to some of his students, Plato kept a portion of his metaphysical doctrines secret and would only teach them orally in the Academy, though some scholars doubt the claims of these ancient sources.
However, some of these sources claim that Plato once disclosed this knowledge to the public in his lecture On the Good (Περὶ τἀγαθοῦ), in which he identified the Good (τὸ ἀγαθόν) with the One (the Unity, τὸ ἕν), the fundamental ontological principle.
The most important aspect of this interpretation of Plato's metaphysics is the continuity between his teaching and the Neoplatonic interpretation of Plotinus.
All the sources related to the ἄγραφα δόγματα have been collected by Konrad Gaiser and published as Testimonia Platonica.
Plato never presents himself as a participant in any of the dialogues, and with the exception of the Apology, there is no suggestion that he heard any of the dialogues firsthand.
Some dialogues have no narrator but have a pure "dramatic" form, some dialogues are narrated by Socrates himself, who speaks in the first person.
The Symposium is narrated by Apollodorus, a Socratic disciple, apparently to Glaucon.
Apollodorus assures his listener that he is recounting the story, which took place when he himself was an infant, not from his own memory, but as remembered by Aristodemus, who told him the story years ago.
In most of the dialogues, the primary speaker is Socrates, who employs a method of questioning which proceeds by a dialogue form.
During the early Renaissance, the Greek language and, along with it, Plato's texts were reintroduced to Western Europe by Byzantine scholars.
Some 250 known Byzantine manuscripts of Plato survive.
In September or October 1484 Filippo Valori and Francesco Berlinghieri printed 1025 copies of Ficino's translation.
The 1578 edition of Plato's complete works published by Henricus Stephanus (Henri Estienne) in Geneva also included parallel Latin translation and running commentary by Joannes Serranus (Jean de Serres).
It was this edition which established standard Stephanus pagination, still in use today.
The text of Plato as received today apparently represents the complete written philosophical work of Plato, based on the first century AD arrangement of Thrasyllus of Mendes.
Since the beginning of the 20th century, many papyri from the Hellenistic period through the third century AD containing text from Plato's dialogues have also been recovered from Egypt, which provide important early witnesses to the text.
The modern standard complete English edition is the 1997 Hackett Plato: Complete Works, edited by John M.
Thirty-five dialogues and thirteen letters (the Epistles) have traditionally been ascribed to Plato, though modern scholarship doubts the authenticity of at least some of these.
There is a broad consensus among scholars to doubt the authenticity of Alcibiades II, Epinomis, Hipparchus, Minos, Lovers, and Theages, while opinions on Alcibiades I, Clitophon, Letters, and Menexenus are more divided.
The following works were transmitted under Plato's name in antiquity, but were already considered spurious by the 1st century AD: Axiochus, Definitions, Demodocus, Epigrams, Eryxias, Halcyon, On Justice, On Virtue, Sisyphus.
No one knows the exact order Plato's dialogues were written in, nor the extent to which some might have been later revised and rewritten.
The works are usually grouped into Early, Middle, and Late period; The following represents one relatively common division amongst developmentalist scholars.
Late: Critias, Sophist, Statesman, Timaeus, Philebus, Laws.
Whereas those classified as "early dialogues" often conclude in aporia, the so-called "middle dialogues" provide more clearly stated positive teachings that are often ascribed to Plato such as the theory of Forms.
The remaining dialogues are classified as "late" and are generally agreed to be difficult and challenging pieces of philosophy.
It should, however, be kept in mind that many of the positions in the ordering are still highly disputed, and also that the very notion that Plato's dialogues can or should be "ordered" is by no means universally accepted.
In the most recent Plato scholarship, writers are increasingly skeptical of the notion that the order of Plato's writings can be established with any precision, though Plato's works are still often characterized as falling at least roughly into three groups stylistically.
During the Islamic Golden ages, Neoplatonism was revived from its founding father, Plotinus.
Neoplatonism, a philosophical current that permeated Islamic scholarship, accentuated one facet of the Qur’anic conception of God—the transcendent—while seemingly neglecting another—the creative.
This philosophical tradition, introduced by Al-Farabi and subsequently elaborated upon by figures such as Avicenna, postulated that all phenomena emanated from the divine source.
It functioned as a conduit, bridging the transcendental nature of the divine with the tangible reality of creation.
In the Islamic context, Neoplatonism facilitated the integration of Platonic philosophy with mystical Islamic thought, fostering a synthesis of ancient philosophical wisdom and religious insight.
Inspired by Plato's Republic, Al-Farabi extended his inquiry beyond mere political theory, proposing an ideal city governed by philosopher-kings.
Plato is also referenced by Jewish philosopher and Talmudic scholar Maimonides in his Guide for the Perplexed.
Many of these commentaries on Plato were translated from Arabic into Latin, in which form they influenced medieval scholastics.
Plato's thought is often compared with that of his most famous student, Aristotle, whose reputation during the Western Middle Ages so completely eclipsed that of Plato that the Scholastic philosophers referred to Aristotle as "the Philosopher".
The only Platonic work known to western scholarship was Timaeus, until translations into Latin were made beginning in the 12th century.
However, the study of Plato continued in the Byzantine Empire, the Caliphates during the Islamic Golden Age, and Spain during the Golden age of Jewish culture.
During the Renaissance, Gemistos Plethon brought Plato's original writings to Florence from Constantinople in the century of its fall.
Many of the greatest early modern scientists and artists who broke with Scholasticism, with the support of the Plato-inspired Lorenzo (grandson of Cosimo), saw Plato's philosophy as the basis for progress in the arts and sciences.
The 17th century Cambridge Platonists sought to reconcile Plato's more problematic beliefs, such as metempsychosis and polyamory, with Christianity.
By the 19th century, Plato's reputation was restored, and at least on par with Aristotle's.
Plato's influence has been especially strong in mathematics and the sciences.
Plato's resurgence inspired some of the greatest advances in logic since Aristotle, primarily through Gottlob Frege, who argued for a form of Platonism regarding abstract mathematical objects that has become prominent in the philosophy of mathematics.
Albert Einstein suggested that the scientist who takes philosophy seriously would have to avoid systematization and take on many different roles, and possibly appear as a Platonist or Pythagorean, in that such a one would have "the viewpoint of logical simplicity as an indispensable and effective tool of his research.
Catholic Encyclopedia.
Sir Isaac Newton ( ; 4 January [O.
He was a key figure in the Scientific Revolution and the Enlightenment that followed.
His book Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica (Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy), first published in 1687, achieved the first great unification in physics and established classical mechanics.
Newton also made seminal contributions to optics, and shares credit with the German mathematician Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz for formulating infinitesimal calculus, although he developed calculus years before Leibniz.
Newton contributed to and refined the scientific method, and his work is considered the most influential in bringing forth modern science.
In the Principia, Newton formulated the laws of motion and universal gravitation that formed the dominant scientific viewpoint for centuries until it was superseded by the theory of relativity.
While this is the case, his laws still serve as excellent approximations for the vast majority of physical phenomena involving low speeds (much less than the speed of light) and weak gravitational fields.
He used his mathematical description of gravity to derive Kepler's laws of planetary motion, account for tides, the trajectories of comets, the precession of the equinoxes and other phenomena, eradicating doubt about the Solar System's heliocentricity.
Newton solved the two-body problem and introduced the three-body problem.
He demonstrated that the motion of objects on Earth and celestial bodies could be accounted for by the same principles.
Newton's inference that the Earth is an oblate spheroid was later confirmed by the geodetic measurements of Alexis Clairaut, Charles Marie de La Condamine, and others, convincing most European scientists of the superiority of Newtonian mechanics over earlier systems.
He was also the first to calculate the age of Earth by experiment, and described a precursor to the modern wind tunnel.
Further, he was the first to provide a quantitative estimate of the solar mass.
Newton built the first reflecting telescope and developed a sophisticated theory of colour based on the observation that a prism separates white light into the colours of the visible spectrum.
His work on light was collected in his book Opticks, published in 1704.
He originated prisms as beam expanders and multiple-prism arrays, which would later become integral to the development of tunable lasers.
Newton invented a double-reflecting quadrant and was the first to theorise the Goos–Hänchen effect.
He also formulated an empirical law of cooling, which was the first heat transfer formulation and serves as the formal basis of convective heat transfer, made the first theoretical calculation of the speed of sound, and introduced the notions of a Newtonian fluid and a black body.
He was also the first to explain the Magnus effect.
Moreover, he was the first to analyse Couette flow.
In addition to his creation of calculus, Newton's work on mathematics was extensive.
He generalised the binomial theorem to any real number, introduced the Puiseux series, was the first to state Bézout's theorem, classified most of the cubic plane curves, contributed to the study of Cremona transformations, developed a method for approximating the roots of a function, originated the Newton–Cotes formulas used for numerical integration, and further produced the earliest explicit enunciation of the general Taylor series.
Additionally, Newton initiated the field of calculus of variations, formulated and solved the earliest problem in geometric probability, devised the earliest form of linear regression, and was a pioneer of vector analysis.
Newton was a fellow of Trinity College and the second Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge; he was appointed at the age of 26.
He was a devout but unorthodox Christian who privately rejected the doctrine of the Trinity.
He refused to take holy orders in the Church of England, unlike most members of the Cambridge faculty of the day.
Beyond his work on the mathematical sciences, Newton dedicated much of his time to the study of alchemy and biblical chronology, but most of his work in those areas remained unpublished until long after his death.
Politically and personally tied to the Whigs, Newton served two brief terms as Member of Parliament for the University of Cambridge, in 1689–1690 and 1701–1702.
He was knighted by Queen Anne in 1705 and spent the last three decades of his life in London, serving as Warden (1696–1699) and Master (1699–1727) of the Royal Mint, in which he increased the accuracy and security of British coinage.
He was also the president of the Royal Society (1703–1727).
Isaac Newton was born (according to the Julian calendar in use in England at the time) on Christmas Day, 25 December 1642 (NS 4 January 1643) at Woolsthorpe Manor in Woolsthorpe-by-Colsterworth, a hamlet in Lincolnshire.
His father, also named Isaac Newton, had died three months before.
Born prematurely, Newton was a small child; his mother, Hannah Ayscough, said that he could have fit inside a quart mug.
When Newton was three, his mother remarried and went to live with her new husband, the Reverend Barnabas Smith, leaving her son in the care of his maternal grandmother, Margery Ayscough (née Blythe).
Newton disliked his stepfather and maintained some enmity towards his mother for marrying him, as revealed by this entry in a list of sins committed up to the age of 19: "Threatening my father and mother Smith to burn them and the house over them.
From the age of about twelve until he was seventeen, Newton was educated at The King's School in Grantham, which taught Latin and Ancient Greek and probably imparted a significant foundation of mathematics.
He was removed from school by his mother and returned to Woolsthorpe by October 1659.
His mother, widowed for the second time, attempted to make him a farmer, an occupation he hated.
Henry Stokes, master at The King's School, and Reverend William Ayscough (Newton's uncle) persuaded his mother to send him back to school.
Motivated by a desire for revenge against a schoolyard bully, whom Newton beat in a fight and humiliated, he became the top-ranked student, distinguishing himself mainly by building sundials and models of windmills.
In June 1661, Newton was admitted to Trinity College at the University of Cambridge.
His uncle the Reverend William Ayscough, who had studied at Cambridge, recommended him to the university.
At Cambridge, Newton started as a subsizar, paying his way by performing valet duties until he was awarded a scholarship in 1664, which covered his university costs for four more years until the completion of his MA.
At the time, Cambridge's teachings were based on those of Aristotle, whom Newton read along with then more modern philosophers, including René Descartes and astronomers such as Galileo Galilei and Thomas Street.
He set down in his notebook a series of "Quaestiones" about mechanical philosophy as he found it.
In 1665, he discovered the generalised binomial theorem and began to develop a mathematical theory that later became calculus.
Soon after Newton obtained his BA degree at Cambridge in August 1665, the university temporarily closed as a precaution against the Great Plague.
Although he had been undistinguished as a Cambridge student, his private studies and the years following his bachelor's degree have been described as "the richest and most productive ever experienced by a scientist".
The next two years alone saw the development of theories on calculus, optics, and the law of gravitation, at his home in Woolsthorpe.
The physicist Louis Trenchard More writes that "There are no other examples of achievement in the history of science to compare with that of Newton during those two golden years.
Newton has been described as an "exceptionally organized" person when it came to note-taking, further dog-earing pages he saw as important.
Furthermore, Newton's "indexes look like present-day indexes: They are alphabetical, by topic.
He also noted his "uncommon skill & industry in mechanical works".
In April 1667, Newton returned to the University of Cambridge, and in October he was elected as a fellow of Trinity.
Fellows were required to take holy orders and be ordained as Anglican priests, although this was not enforced in the Restoration years, and an assertion of conformity to the Church of England was sufficient.
He made the commitment that "I will either set Theology as the object of my studies and will take holy orders when the time prescribed by these statutes [7 years] arrives, or I will resign from the college.
By 1675 the issue could not be avoided, and his unconventional views stood in the way.
His academic work impressed the Lucasian Professor Isaac Barrow, who was anxious to develop his own religious and administrative potential (he became master of Trinity College two years later); in 1669, Newton succeeded him, only one year after receiving his MA.
Newton argued that this should exempt him from the ordination requirement, and King Charles II, whose permission was needed, accepted this argument; thus, a conflict between Newton's religious views and Anglican orthodoxy was averted.
He was appointed at the age of 26.
As accomplished as Newton was as a theoretician, he was less effective as a teacher; his classes were almost always empty.
Humphrey Newton, his sizar (assistant), noted that Newton would arrive on time and, if the room was empty, he would reduce his lecture time in half from 30 to 15 minutes, talk to the walls, then retreat to his experiments, thus fulfilling his contractual obligations.
For his part Newton enjoyed neither teaching nor students.
Over his career he was only assigned three students to tutor and none were noteworthy.
Newton was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1672.
The Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at Cambridge position included the responsibility of instructing geography.
In 1672, and again in 1681, Newton published a revised, corrected, and amended edition of the Geographia Generalis, a geography textbook first published in 1650 by the then-deceased Bernhardus Varenius.
In the Geographia Generalis, Varenius attempted to create a theoretical foundation linking scientific principles to classical concepts in geography, and considered geography to be a mix between science and pure mathematics applied to quantifying features of the Earth.
While it is unclear if Newton ever lectured in geography, the 1733 Dugdale and Shaw English translation of the book stated Newton published the book to be read by students while he lectured on the subject.
The Geographia Generalis is viewed by some as the dividing line between ancient and modern traditions in the history of geography, and Newton's involvement in the subsequent editions is thought to be a large part of the reason for this enduring legacy.
Newton's work has been said "to distinctly advance every branch of mathematics then studied".
His work on calculus, usually referred to as fluxions, began in 1664, and by 20 May 1665 as seen in a manuscript, Newton "had already developed the calculus to the point where he could compute the tangent and the curvature at any point of a continuous curve".
His work by 1665 amounted to a systematic calculus that unified differentiation and integration, which he applied to the dynamic analysis of algebraic and transcendental curves, an approach described by scholar Tom Whiteside as "radically novel, indeed unprecedented" and which later directly informed the theory of central-force orbits in the Principia.
Another manuscript of October 1666, is now published among Newton's mathematical papers.
Newton recorded a definitive tract of calculus in what is called his "Waste Book".
He was self-taught in mathematics and did his research without help, as according to scholar Richard S.
Westfall, "By every indication we have, Newton carried out his education in mathematics and his program of research entirely on his own.
Newton later became involved in a dispute with the German polymath Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz over priority in the development of calculus.
Both are now credited with independently developing calculus, though with very different mathematical notations.
However, it is established that Newton came to develop calculus much earlier than Leibniz.
Despite this, the notation of Leibniz is recognised as the more convenient notation, being adopted by continental European mathematicians, and after 1820, by British mathematicians.
The historian of science A.
Rupert Hall notes that while Leibniz deserves credit for his independent formulation of calculus, Newton was undoubtedly the first to develop it, stating:But all these matters are of little weight in comparison with the central truth, which has indeed long been universally recognized, that Newton was master of the essential techniques of the calculus by the end of 1666, almost exactly nine years before Leibniz .
Newton's claim to have mastered the new infinitesimal calculus long before Leibniz, and even to have written — or at least made a good start upon — a publishable exposition of it as early as 1671, is certainly borne out by copious evidence, and though Leibniz and some of his friends sought to belittle Newton's case, the truth has not been seriously in doubt for the last 250 years.
Hall further notes that in Principia, Newton was able to "formulate and resolve problems by the integration of differential equations" and "in fact, he anticipated in his book many results that later exponents of the calculus regarded as their own novel achievements.
Despite the convenience of Leibniz's notation, it has been noted that Newton's notation could also have developed multivariate techniques, with his dot notation still widely used in physics.
Some academics have noted the richness and depth of Newton's work, such as the physicist Roger Penrose, stating "in most cases Newton's geometrical methods are not only more concise and elegant, they reveal deeper principles than would become evident by the use of those formal methods of calculus that nowadays would seem more direct.
His work extensively uses calculus in geometric form based on limiting values of the ratios of vanishingly small quantities: in the Principia itself, Newton gave demonstration of this under the name of "the method of first and last ratios" and explained why he put his expositions in this form, remarking also that "hereby the same thing is performed as by the method of indivisibles.
It has been argued that Newton had an imprecise or limited understanding of limits.
However, the mathematician Bruce Pourciau contends that in his Principia, Newton actually demonstrated a more sophisticated understanding of limits than he is generally credited with, including being the first to present an epsilon argument.
Newton had been reluctant to publish his calculus because he feared controversy and criticism.
He was close to the Swiss mathematician Nicolas Fatio de Duillier.
In 1691, Duillier started to write a new version of Newton's Principia, and corresponded with Leibniz.
In 1693, the relationship between Duillier and Newton deteriorated and the book was never completed.
Starting in 1699, Duillier accused Leibniz of plagiarism.
The mathematician John Keill accused Leibniz of plagiarism in 1708 in the Royal Society journal, thereby deteriorating the situation even more.
The dispute then broke out in full force in 1711 when the Royal Society proclaimed in a study that it was Newton who was the true discoverer and labelled Leibniz a fraud; it was later found that Newton wrote the study's concluding remarks on Leibniz.
Thus began the bitter controversy which marred the lives of both men until Leibniz's death in 1716.
Newton's first major mathematical discovery was the generalised binomial theorem, valid for any exponent, in 1664–65, which has been called "one of the most powerful and significant in the whole of mathematics.
Newton is also a founder of the theory of Cremona transformations, and he made substantial contributions to the theory of finite differences, with Newton regarded as "the single most significant contributor to finite difference interpolation", with many formulas created by Newton.
He was the first to state Bézout's theorem, and was also the first to use fractional indices and to employ coordinate geometry to derive solutions to Diophantine equations.
He approximated partial sums of the harmonic series by logarithms (a precursor to Euler's summation formula) and was the first to use power series with confidence and to revert power series.
He introduced the Puisseux series.
He also provided the earliest explicit formulation of the general Taylor series, which appeared in a 1691-1692 draft of his De Quadratura Curvarum.
He originated the Newton-Cotes formulas for numerical integration.
Newton's work on infinite series was inspired by Simon Stevin's decimals.
He also initiated the field of calculus of variations, being the first to formulate and solve a problem in the field, that being Newton's minimal resistance problem, which he posed and solved in 1685, later publishing it in Principia in 1687.
It is regarded as one of the most difficult problems tackled by variational methods prior to the twentieth century.
He then used calculus of variations in his solving of the brachistochrone curve problem in 1697, which was posed by Johann Bernoulli in 1696, and which he famously solved in a night, thus pioneering the field with his work on the two problems.
He was also a pioneer of vector analysis, as he demonstrated how to apply the parallelogram law for adding various physical quantities and realised that these quantities could be broken down into components in any direction.
He is credited with introducing the notion of the vector in his Principia, by proposing that physical quantities like velocity, acceleration, momentum, and force be treated as directed quantities, thereby making Newton the "true originator of this mathematical object".
Newton was probably first to develop a system of polar coordinates in a strictly analytic sense, with his work in relation to the topic being superior, in both generality and flexibility, to any other during his lifetime.
His 1671 Method of Fluxions work preceded the earliest publication on the subject by Jacob Bernoulli in 1691.
He is also credited as the originator of bipolar coordinates in a strict sense.
A private manuscript of Newton's which dates to 1664–66 contains what is the earliest known problem in the field of geometric probability.
The problem dealt with the likelihood of a negligible ball landing in one of two unequal sectors of a circle.
In analysing this problem, he proposed substituting the enumeration of occurrences with their quantitative assessment, and replacing the estimation of an area's proportion with a tally of points, which has led to him being credited as founding stereology.
Newton was responsible for the modern origin of Gaussian elimination in Europe.
In 1669 to 1670, Newton wrote that all the algebra books known to him lacked a lesson for solving simultaneous equations, which he then supplied.
His notes lay unpublished for decades, but once released, his textbook became the most influential of its kind, establishing the method of substitution and the key terminology of 'extermination' (now known as elimination).
In the 1660s and 1670s, Newton found 72 of the 78 "species" of cubic curves and categorised them into four types, systemising his results in later publications.
However, a 1690s manuscript later analysed showed that Newton had identified all 78 cubic curves, but chose not to publish the remaining six for unknown reasons.
In 1717, and probably with Newton's help, James Stirling proved that every cubic was one of these four types.
He claimed that the four types could be obtained by plane projection from one of them, and this was proved in 1731, four years after his death.
Newton briefly dabbled in probability.
In letters with Samuel Pepys in 1693, they corresponded over the Newton–Pepys problem, which was a problem about the probability of throwing sixes from a certain number of dice.
For it, outcome A was that six dice are tossed with at least one six appearing, outcome B that twelve dice are tossed with at least two sixes appearing, and outcome C in which eighteen dice are tossed with at least three sixes appearing.
Newton solved it correctly, choosing outcome A, Pepys incorrectly chose the wrong outcome of C.
However, Newton's intuitive explanation for the problem was flawed.
In 1666, Newton observed that the spectrum of colours exiting a prism in the position of minimum deviation is oblong, even when the light ray entering the prism is circular, which is to say, the prism refracts different colours by different angles.
This led him to conclude that colour is a property intrinsic to light – a point which had, until then, been a matter of debate.
From 1670 to 1672, Newton lectured on optics.
During this period he investigated the refraction of light, demonstrating that the multicoloured image produced by a prism, which he named a spectrum, could be recomposed into white light by a lens and a second prism.
Modern scholarship has revealed that Newton's analysis and resynthesis of white light owes a debt to corpuscular alchemy.
In his work on Newton's rings in 1671, he used a method that was unprecedented in the 17th century, as "he averaged all of the differences, and he then calculated the difference between the average and the value for the first ring", in effect introducing a now standard method for reducing noise in measurements, and which does not appear elsewhere at the time.
He extended his "error-slaying method" to studies of equinoxes in 1700, which was described as an "altogether unprecedented method" but differed in that here "Newton required good values for each of the original equinoctial times, and so he devised a method that allowed them to, as it were, self-correct.
He differentiated between two uneven sets of data and may have considered an optimal solution regarding bias, although not in terms of effectiveness.
He showed that coloured light does not change its properties by separating out a coloured beam and shining it on various objects, and that regardless of whether reflected, scattered, or transmitted, the light remains the same colour.
Thus, he observed that colour is the result of objects interacting with already-coloured light rather than objects generating the colour themselves.
This is known as Newton's theory of colour.
His 1672 paper on the nature of white light and colours forms the basis for all work that followed on colour and colour vision.
From this work, he concluded that the lens of any refracting telescope would suffer from the dispersion of light into colours (chromatic aberration).
As a proof of the concept, he constructed a telescope using reflective mirrors instead of lenses as the objective to bypass that problem.
Building the design, the first known functional reflecting telescope, today known as a Newtonian telescope, involved solving the problem of a suitable mirror material and shaping technique.
Previous designs for the reflecting telescope were never put into practice or ended in failure, thereby making Newton's telescope the first one truly created.
Newton grounded his own mirrors out of a custom composition of highly reflective speculum metal, using Newton's rings to judge the quality of the optics for his telescopes.
In late 1668, he was able to produce this first reflecting telescope.
It was about eight inches long and it gave a clearer and larger image.
Newton reported that he could see the four Galilean moons of Jupiter and the crescent phase of Venus with his new reflecting telescope.
In 1671, he was asked for a demonstration of his reflecting telescope by the Royal Society.
Their interest encouraged him to publish his notes, Of Colours, which he later expanded into the work Opticks.
When Robert Hooke criticised some of Newton's ideas, Newton was so offended that he withdrew from public debate.
However, the two had brief exchanges in 1679–80, when Hooke, who had been appointed Secretary of the Royal Society, opened a correspondence intended to elicit contributions from Newton to Royal Society transactions, which had the effect of stimulating Newton to work out a proof that the elliptical form of planetary orbits would result from a centripetal force inversely proportional to the square of the radius vector.
In astronomy, Newton is further credited with the realisation that high-altitude sites are superior for observation because they provide the "most serene and quiet Air" above the dense, turbulent atmosphere ("grosser Clouds"), thereby reducing star twinkling.
Newton argued that light is composed of particles or corpuscles, which were refracted by accelerating into a denser medium.
He verged on soundlike waves to explain the repeated pattern of reflection and transmission by thin films (Opticks Bk.
Despite his known preference of a particle theory, Newton noted that light had both particle-like and wave-like properties in Opticks; he believed that corpuscles must interact with waves in a medium to explain interference patterns and the general phenomenon of diffraction.
In his Hypothesis of Light of 1675, Newton posited the existence of the ether to transmit forces between particles.
The contact with the Cambridge Platonist philosopher Henry More revived his interest in alchemy.
He replaced the ether with occult forces based on Hermetic ideas of attraction and repulsion between particles.
His contributions to science cannot be isolated from his interest in alchemy.
This was at a time when there was no clear distinction between alchemy and science.
Newton contributed to the study of astigmatism by helping to erect its mathematical foundation through his discovery that when oblique pencils of light undergo refraction, two distinct image points are created.
This would later stimulate the work of Thomas Young.
In 1704, Newton published Opticks, in which he expounded his corpuscular theory of light, and included a set of queries at the end, which were posed as unanswered questions and positive assertions.
In line with his corpuscle theory, he thought that normal matter was made of grosser corpuscles and speculated that through a kind of alchemical transmutation, with query 30 stating "Are not gross Bodies and Light convertible into one another, and may not Bodies receive much of their Activity from the Particles of Light which enter their Composition?
Opticks has been referred to as one of the "earliest exemplars of experimental procedure".
In 1699, Newton presented an improved version of his reflecting quadrant, or octant, that he had previously designed to the Royal Society.
His design was probably built as early as 1677.
It is notable for being the first quadrant to use two mirrors, which greatly improved the accuracy of measurements since it provided a stable view of both the horizon and the celestial body at the same time.
His quadrant was built but appears to have not survived to the present.
John Hadley would later construct his own double-reflecting quadrant that was nearly identical to the one invented by Newton.
However, Hadley likely did not know of Newton's original invention, causing confusion regarding originality.
In 1704, Newton constructed and presented a burning mirror to the Royal Society.
It consisted of seven concave glass mirrors, each about one foot in diameter.
It is estimated that it reached a maximum possible radiant energy of 460 W cm⁻², which has been described as "certainly brighter thermally than a thousand Suns (1,000 × 0.
As a result of the maximum radiant intensity possibly achieved with his mirror he "may have produced the greatest intensity of radiation brought about by human agency before the arrival of nuclear weapons in 1945.
William Derham thought it be to the most powerful burning mirror in Europe at the time.
Newton also made early studies into electricity, as he constructed a primitive form of a frictional electrostatic generator using a glass globe, the first to do so with glass instead of sulfur, which had previously been used by scientists such as Otto von Guericke to construct their globes.
He detailed an experiment in 1675 that showed when one side of a glass sheet is rubbed to create an electric charge, it attracts "light bodies" to the opposite side.
He interpreted this as evidence that electric forces could pass through glass.
Newton also reported to the Royal Society that glass was effective for generating static electricity, classifying it as a "good electric" decades before this property was widely known.
His idea in Opticks that optical reflection and refraction arise from interactions across the entire surface is seen as a precursor to the field theory of the electric force.
He also recognised the crucial role of electricity in nature, believing it to be responsible for various phenomena, including the emission, reflection, refraction, inflection, and heating effects of light.
He proposed that electricity was involved in the sensations experienced by the human body, affecting everything from muscle movement to brain function.
His theory of nervous transmission had an immense influence on the work of Luigi Galvani, as Newton's theory focused on electricity as a possible mediator of nervous transmission, which went against the prevailing Cartesian hydraulic theory of the time.
He was also the first to present a clear and balanced theory for how both electrical and chemical mechanisms could work together in the nervous system.
Newton's mass-dispersion model, ancestral to the successful use of the least action principle, provided a credible framework for understanding refraction, particularly in its approach to refraction in terms of momentum.
In Opticks, Newton introduced prisms as beam expanders and multiple-prism arrays, prismatic configurations that nearly 278 years later were incorporated into tunable lasers, where multiple-prism beam expanders became central to the development of narrow-linewidth systems.
The use of these prismatic beam expanders led to the multiple-prism dispersion theory.
Newton was the first to theorise the Goos–Hänchen effect, an optical phenomenon in which linearly polarised light undergoes a small lateral shift when totally internally reflected.
He provided both experimental and theoretical explanations for it using a mechanical model.
Science came to realise the difference between perception of colour and mathematisable optics.
The German poet and scientist Johann Wolfgang von Goethe could not shake the Newtonian foundation but "one hole Goethe did find in Newton's armour, .
Newton had committed himself to the doctrine that refraction without colour was impossible.
He, therefore, thought that the object-glasses of telescopes must forever remain imperfect, achromatism and refraction being incompatible.
This inference was proved by Dollond to be wrong.
Newton had been developing his theory of gravitation as far back as 1665.
In 1679, he returned to his work on celestial mechanics by considering gravitation and its effect on the orbits of planets with reference to Kepler's laws of planetary motion.
Newton's reawakening interest in astronomical matters received further stimulus by the appearance of a comet in the winter of 1680–1681, on which he corresponded with John Flamsteed.
After his exchanges with Robert Hooke, Newton worked out a proof that the elliptical form of planetary orbits would result from a centripetal force inversely proportional to the square of the radius vector.
He shared his results with Edmond Halley and the Royal Society in De motu corporum in gyrum, a tract written on about nine sheets which was copied into the Royal Society's Register Book in December 1684.
As part of this work, Newton also coined the term centripetal force.
This tract contained the nucleus that Newton would develop and expand to form the Principia.
The Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica was published on 5 July 1687 with encouragement and financial help from Halley.
In this work, Newton stated the three universal laws of motion.
Together, these laws describe the relationship between any object, the forces acting upon it and the resulting motion, laying the foundation for classical mechanics.
They contributed to numerous advances during the Industrial Revolution and were not improved upon for more than 200 years.
Many of these advances still underpin non-relativistic technologies today.
Newton used the Latin word gravitas (weight) for the effect that would become known as gravity, and formulated the law of universal gravitation.
His work achieved the first great unification in physics.
He solved the two-body problem, and introduced the three-body problem.
In the same work, Newton presented a calculus-like method of geometrical analysis using 'first and last ratios', gave the first analytical determination (based on Boyle's law) of the speed of sound in air, inferred the oblateness of Earth's spheroidal figure, accounted for the precession of the equinoxes as a result of the Moon's gravitational attraction on the Earth's oblateness, initiated the gravitational study of the irregularities in the motion of the Moon, provided a theory for the determination of the orbits of comets, and much more.
Newton's biographer David Brewster reported that the complexity of applying his theory of gravity to the motion of the moon was so great it affected Newton's health: "[H]e was deprived of his appetite and sleep" during his work on the problem in 1692–93, and told the astronomer John Machin that "his head never ached but when he was studying the subject".
According to Brewster, Halley also told John Conduitt that when pressed to complete his analysis Newton "always replied that it made his head ache, and kept him awake so often, that he would think of it no more".
Newton identified two "principal cases of attraction"—the inverse-square law and a central force proportional to distance—showing that both yield stable conic-section orbits and that spherically symmetric bodies behave as if their mass were concentrated at a point; in modern terms, this linear force law is mathematically equivalent to the force associated with the cosmological constant.
Through Book II of the Principia, Newton was an important pioneer of fluid mechanics, and later analysis has shown that of its 53 propositions almost all are correct, with only two or three open to question.
Propositions 1–18 of the book are the first comprehensive treatment of motion under resistance proportional to velocity or its square, leading the scholar Richard S.
Westfall to remark that 'almost without precedent, Newton created the scientific treatment of motion under conditions of resistance, that is, of motion as it is found in the world'.
Proposition 15 showed that under an atmosphere whose density falls inversely with distance, a circular-orbiting body subject to drag will trace an equiangular spiral—a result later independently derived by Morduchow and Volpe (1973).
In Section IX of Book II, he formulated the linear relation between viscous resistance and velocity gradient that now defines a Newtonian fluid, despite his experiments giving little direct insight into viscosity.
Newton also discussed the circular motion of fluids and was the first to analyse Couette flow, initially in Proposition 51 for a single rotating cylinder and extended in Corollary 2 to the flow between two concentric cylinders.
Further, he was the first to analyse the resistance of axisymmetric bodies moving through a rarefied medium.
In Principia, Newton provided the first quantitative estimate of the solar mass, with later editions incorporating more accurate measurements, bringing his Sun-to-Earth mass ratio calculation close to the modern value.
He further determined the masses and densities of Jupiter and Saturn, putting all four celestial bodies (Sun, Earth, Jupiter, and Saturn) on the same comparative scale.
This achievement by Newton has been called "a supreme expression of the doctrine that one set of physical concepts and principles applies to all bodies on earth, the earth itself, and bodies anywhere throughout the universe".
Newton made clear his heliocentric view of the Solar System—developed in a somewhat modern way because already in the mid-1680s he recognised the "deviation of the Sun" from the centre of gravity of the Solar System.
For Newton, it was not precisely the centre of the Sun or any other body that could be considered at rest, but rather "the common centre of gravity of the Earth, the Sun and all the Planets is to be esteem'd the Centre of the World", and this centre of gravity "either is at rest or moves uniformly forward in a right line".
Newton was criticised for introducing "occult agencies" into science because of his postulate of an invisible force able to act over vast distances.
Later, in the second edition of the Principia (1713), Newton firmly rejected such criticisms in a concluding General Scholium, writing that it was enough that the phenomenon implied a gravitational attraction, as they did; but they did not so far indicate its cause, and it was both unnecessary and improper to frame hypotheses of things that were not implied by the phenomenon.
With the Principia, Newton became internationally recognised.
He acquired a circle of admirers, including the Swiss-born mathematician Nicolas Fatio de Duillier.
Newton studied heat and energy flow, formulating an empirical law of cooling which states that the rate at which an object cools is proportional to the temperature difference between the object and its surrounding environment.
It was first formulated in 1701, being the first heat transfer formulation and serves as the formal basis of convective heat transfer, later being incorporated by Joseph Fourier into his work.
Newton was the first to observe and qualitatively describe what would much later be formalised as the Magnus effect, nearly two centuries before Heinrich Magnus's experimental studies.
In a 1672 text, Newton recounted watching tennis players at Cambridge college and noted how a tennis ball struck obliquely with a spinning motion curved in flight.
He explained that the ball's combination of circular and progressive motion caused one side to "press and beat the contiguous air more violently" than the other, thereby producing "a reluctancy and reaction of the air proportionably greater", an astute observation of the pressure differential responsible for lateral deflection.
Newton's role as a philosopher was deeply influential, and understanding the philosophical landscape of the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries requires recognising his central contributions.
Historically, Newton was widely regarded as a core figure in modern philosophy.
For example, Johann Jakob Brucker's Historia Critica Philosophiae (1744), considered the first comprehensive modern history of philosophy, prominently positioned Newton as a central philosophical figure.
This portrayal notably shaped the perception of modern philosophy among leading Enlightenment intellectuals, including figures such as Denis Diderot, Jean le Rond d'Alembert, and Immanuel Kant.
Starting with the second edition of his Principia, Newton included a final section on science philosophy or method.
It was here that he wrote his famous line, in Latin, "hypotheses non fingo", which can be translated as "I don't make hypotheses," (the direct translation of "fingo" is "frame", but in context he was advocating against the use of hypotheses in science).
Newton's rejection of hypotheses ("hypotheses non fingo") emphasised that he refused to speculate on causes not directly supported by phenomena.
Harper explains that Newton's experimental philosophy involves clearly distinguishing hypotheses—unverified conjectures—from propositions established through phenomena and generalised by induction.
According to Newton, true scientific inquiry requires grounding explanations strictly on observable data rather than speculative reasoning.
Thus, for Newton, proposing hypotheses without empirical backing undermines the integrity of experimental philosophy, as hypotheses should serve merely as tentative suggestions subordinate to observational evidence.
Newton contributed to and refined the scientific method.
In his work on the properties of light in the 1670s, he showed his rigorous method, which was conducting experiments, taking detailed notes, making measurements, conducting more experiments that grew out of the initial ones, he formulated a theory, created more experiments to test it, and finally described the entire process so other scientists could replicate every step.
Newton's scientific method went beyond simple prediction in three critical ways, thereby enriching the basic hypothetico-deductive model.
First, it established a richer ideal of empirical success, requiring phenomena to accurately measure theoretical parameters.
Second, it transformed theoretical questions into ones empirically solvable by measurement.
Third, it used provisionally accepted propositions to guide research, enabling the method of successive approximations where deviations drive the creation of more accurate models.
This robust method of theory-mediated measurements was adopted by his successors for extensions of his theory to astronomy and remains a foundational element in modern physics.
In the 1690s, Newton wrote a number of religious tracts dealing with the literal and symbolic interpretation of the Bible.
A manuscript Newton sent to John Locke in which he disputed the fidelity of 1 John 5:7—the Johannine Comma—and its fidelity to the original manuscripts of the New Testament, remained unpublished until 1785.
Newton was also a member of the Parliament of England for Cambridge University in 1689 and 1701, but according to some accounts his only comments were to complain about a cold draught in the chamber and request that the window be closed.
He was, however, noted by the Cambridge diarist Abraham de la Pryme to have rebuked students who were frightening locals by claiming that a house was haunted.
Newton moved to London to take up the post of Warden of the Mint during the reign of King William III in 1696, a position that he had obtained through the patronage of Charles Montagu, 1st Earl of Halifax, then Chancellor of the Exchequer.
He took charge of England's great recoining, clashed with Robert Lucas, 3rd Baron Lucas of Shenfield, the Governor of the Tower, and secured the job of deputy comptroller of the temporary Chester branch for Edmond Halley.
Newton became perhaps the best-known Master of the Mint upon the death of Thomas Neale in 1699, a position he held for the last 30 years of his life.
These appointments were intended as sinecures, but Newton took them seriously.
He retired from his Cambridge duties in 1701, and exercised his authority to reform the currency and punish clippers and counterfeiters.
As Warden, and afterwards as Master, of the Royal Mint, Newton estimated that 20 per cent of the coins taken in during the Great Recoinage of 1696 were counterfeit.
Counterfeiting was high treason, punishable by the felon being hanged, drawn and quartered.
Despite this, convicting even the most flagrant criminals could be extremely difficult, but Newton proved equal to the task.
Disguised as a habitué of bars and taverns, he gathered much of that evidence himself.
For all the barriers placed to prosecution, and separating the branches of government, English law still had ancient and formidable customs of authority.
Newton had himself made a justice of the peace in all the home counties.
A draft letter regarding the matter is included in Newton's personal first edition of Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica, which he must have been amending at the time.
Then he conducted more than 100 cross-examinations of witnesses, informers, and suspects between June 1698 and Christmas 1699.
He successfully prosecuted 28 coiners, including the serial counterfeiter William Chaloner, who was hanged.
Beyond prosecuting counterfeiters, he improved minting technology and reduced the standard deviation of the weight of guineas from 1.
Starting in 1707, Newton introduced the practice of testing a small sample of coins, a pound in weight, in the trial of the pyx, which helped to reduce the size of admissible error.
He ultimately saved the Treasury a then £41,510, roughly £3 million in 2012, with his improvements lasting until the 1770s, thereby increasing the accuracy of British coinage.
He greatly increased the productivity of the Mint, as he raised the weekly output of coin from 15,000 pounds to 100,000 pounds.
Newton has also been credited with pioneering time and motion studies, although his work was a theoretical calculation of physical capability rather than a standardised industrial productivity model.
Newton's activities at the Mint influenced rising scientific and commercial interests in fields such as numismatics, geology, mining, metallurgy, and metrology in the early 18th century.
Newton held a surprisingly modern view on economics, believing that paper credit, such as government debt, was a practical and wise solution to the limitations of a currency based solely on metal.
He argued that increasing the supply of this paper credit could lower interest rates, which would in turn stimulate trade and create employment.
Newton also held a radical minority opinion that the value of both metal and paper currency was set by public opinion and trust.
Newton was made president of the Royal Society in 1703 and an associate of the French Académie des Sciences.
In his position at the Royal Society, Newton made an enemy of John Flamsteed, the Astronomer Royal, by prematurely publishing Flamsteed's Historia Coelestis Britannica, which Newton had used in his studies.
In April 1705, Newton was knighted by Queen Anne during a royal visit to Trinity College, Cambridge.
The knighthood is likely to have been motivated by political considerations connected with the parliamentary election in May 1705, rather than any recognition of Newton's scientific work or services as Master of the Mint.
Newton was the second scientist to be knighted, after Francis Bacon.
As a result of a report written by Newton on 21 September 1717 to the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury, the bimetallic relationship between gold coins and silver coins was changed by royal proclamation on 22 December 1717, forbidding the exchange of gold guineas for more than 21 silver shillings.
This inadvertently resulted in a silver shortage as silver coins were used to pay for imports, while exports were paid for in gold, effectively moving Britain from the silver standard to its first gold standard.
It is a matter of debate as to whether he intended to do this or not.
It has been argued that Newton viewed his work at the Mint as a continuation of his alchemical work.
Newton was invested in the South Sea Company and lost at least £10,000, and plausibly more than £20,000 (£4.
Since he was already rich before the bubble, Newton still died rich, at estate value around £30,000.
Toward the end of his life, Newton spent some time at Cranbury Park, near Winchester, the country residence of his niece and her husband, though he primarily lived in London.
His half-niece, Catherine Barton, served as his hostess in social affairs at his house on Jermyn Street in London.
In a surviving letter written in 1700 while she was recovering from smallpox, Newton closed with the phrase "your very loving uncle", expressing familial concern in a manner typical of seventeenth-century epistolary style.
The historian Patricia Fara notes that the letter's tone is warm and paternal, including medical advice and attention to her appearance during convalescence, rather than conveying any romantic implication.
Newton was an active investor at times, including in the South Sea Bubble.
At his death his estate was valued at around £30,000 — the equivalent of nearly £1 billion measured as a share of contemporary GDP, or roughly £6 million by standard inflation measures.
Newton died in his sleep in London on 20 March 1727 (NS 31 March 1727), aged 84.
Newton was given a state funeral—the first in England for someone recognized primarily for intellectual achievement.
The Lord Chancellor, two dukes, and three earls bore his pall, with most of the Royal Society following.
His body lay in state in Westminster Abbey for eight days before burial in the nave.
Newton was the first scientist to be buried in the abbey.
Voltaire may have been present at his funeral.
A bachelor, he had divested much of his estate to relatives during his last years, and died intestate.
His papers went to John Conduitt and Catherine Barton.
Shortly after his death, a plaster death mask was moulded of Newton.
It was used by the Flemish sculptor John Michael Rysbrack in making a sculpture of Newton.
It is now held by the Royal Society.
Newton's hair was posthumously examined and found to contain mercury, probably resulting from his alchemical pursuits.
Mercury poisoning could explain Newton's eccentricity in late life.
Newton has been described as an incredibly driven and disciplined man who dedicated his life to his work.
He is known for having a prodigious appetite for work, which he prioritised above his personal health.
Newton also maintained strict control over his physical appetites, being sparing with food and drink and becoming a vegetarian later in life.
While Newton was a secretive and neurotic individual, he is not considered to have been psychotic or bipolar.
He has been described as an "incredible polymath" who was "immensely versatile", with some of his first studies relating to a potential phonetic alphabet and universal language.
Newton's diverse range of interests is seen in his library, which contained 1,752 books that could be identified.
A large portion consisted of works on theology (27.
Ultimately, books related to his famous scientific work made up slightly less than 12% of the total collection.
Although it was claimed that he was once engaged, Newton never married.
Voltaire, who was in London at the time of Newton's funeral, said that he "was never sensible to any passion, was not subject to the common frailties of mankind, nor had any commerce with women—a circumstance which was assured me by the physician and surgeon who attended him in his last moments.
Newton had a close friendship with the Swiss mathematician Nicolas Fatio de Duillier, whom he met in London around 1689; some of their correspondence has survived.
Their relationship came to an abrupt and unexplained end in 1693, and at the same time Newton suffered a nervous breakdown, which included sending wild accusatory letters to his friends Samuel Pepys and John Locke.
His note to the latter included the charge that Locke had endeavoured to "embroil" him with "woemen & by other means".
Newton appeared to be relatively modest about his achievements, writing in a later memoir, "I do not know what I may appear to the world, but to myself I seem to have been only like a boy playing on the sea-shore, and diverting myself in now and then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me.
In a letter to Robert Hooke in February 1675, for instance, he confessed "If I have seen further it is by standing on the shoulders of giants.
On the other hand, the widely known proverb about standing on the shoulders of giants, found in the 17th-century poet George Herbert's Jacula Prudentum (1651) among others, had as its main point that "a dwarf on a giant's shoulders sees farther of the two", and so in effect place Newton himself rather than Hooke as the 'dwarf' who saw farther.
Although born into an Anglican family, by his thirties Newton had developed unorthodox beliefs, with historian Stephen Snobelen labelling him a heretic.
Despite this, Newton in his time was considered a knowledgeable and insightful theologian who was respected by his contemporaries, with Thomas Tenison, the then Archbishop of Canterbury, telling him "You know more divinity than all of us put together", and the philosopher John Locke describing him as "a very valuable man not onely for his wonderful skill in Mathematicks but in divinity too and his great knowledg in the Scriptures where in I know few his equals".
By 1680, his reputation in biblical scholarship was established.
John Mill sought his advice on a critical New Testament edition, and the two had a short correspondence on interpreting the early chapters of Genesis as well.
Thomas Burnet consulted Newton on drafts of Telluris theoria sacra, and with Henry More he discussed the interpretation of the Apocalypse at Cambridge.
William Stukeley wrote of Newton’s diligence in reading and studying the Bible:No man in England read the Bible more carefully than he did, none study’d it more, as appears by his printed works, by many pieces he left which are not printed, and even by the Bible which he commonly used, thumbd over, as they call it, in an extraordinary degree, with frequency of use.
By 1672, he had started to record his theological researches in notebooks which he showed to no one and which have only been available for public examination since 1972.
Over half of what Newton wrote concerned theology and alchemy, and most has never been printed.
His writings show extensive knowledge of early Church texts and reveal that he sided with Arius, who rejected the conventional view of the Trinity and was the losing party in the conflict with Athanasius over the Creed.
Newton "recognized Christ as a divine mediator between God and man, who was subordinate to the Father who created him.
Newton tried unsuccessfully to obtain one of the two fellowships that exempted the holder from the ordination requirement.
At the last moment in 1675, he received a government dispensation that excused him and all future holders of the Lucasian chair.
Worshipping Jesus Christ as God was, in Newton's eyes, idolatry, an act he believed to be the fundamental sin.
In 1999, Snobelen wrote, that "Isaac Newton was a heretic.
He hid his faith so well that scholars are still unraveling his personal beliefs.
Although the laws of motion and universal gravitation became Newton's best-known discoveries, he warned against using them to view the Universe as a mere machine, as if akin to a great clock.
He said, "So then gravity may put the planets into motion, but without the Divine Power it could never put them into such a circulating motion, as they have about the sun".
Along with his scientific fame, Newton's studies of the Bible and of the early Church Fathers were also noteworthy.
Newton wrote works on textual criticism, most notably An Historical Account of Two Notable Corruptions of Scripture and Observations upon the Prophecies of Daniel, and the Apocalypse of St.
He placed the crucifixion of Jesus Christ at 3 April, AD 33, which agrees with one traditionally accepted date.
He believed in a rationally immanent world, but he rejected the hylozoism implicit in Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and Baruch Spinoza.
The ordered and dynamically informed Universe could be understood, and must be understood, by an active reason.
In his correspondence, he claimed that in writing the Principia "I had an eye upon such Principles as might work with considering men for the belief of a Deity".
He saw evidence of design in the system of the world: "Such a wonderful uniformity in the planetary system must be allowed the effect of choice".
But Newton insisted that divine intervention would eventually be required to reform the system, due to the slow growth of instabilities.
For this, Leibniz lampooned him: "God Almighty wants to wind up his watch from time to time: otherwise it would cease to move.
He had not, it seems, sufficient foresight to make it a perpetual motion.
Newton's position was defended by his follower Samuel Clarke in a famous correspondence.
A century later, Pierre-Simon Laplace's work Celestial Mechanics had a natural explanation for why the planet orbits do not require periodic divine intervention.
The contrast between Laplace's mechanistic worldview and Newton's one is the most strident considering the famous answer which the French scientist gave Napoleon, who had criticised him for the absence of the Creator in the Mécanique céleste: "Sire, j'ai pu me passer de cette hypothèse" ("Sir, I can do without this hypothesis").
Scholars long debated whether Newton disputed the doctrine of the Trinity.
His first biographer, David Brewster, who compiled his manuscripts, interpreted Newton as questioning the veracity of some passages used to support the Trinity, but never denying the doctrine of the Trinity as such.
In the twentieth century, encrypted manuscripts written by Newton and bought by John Maynard Keynes (among others) were deciphered and it became known that Newton did indeed reject Trinitarianism.
Newton broadly endorsed the future restoration of the Jews to the Land of Israel as a component of biblical prophecy while refraining from assigning it a precise date.
This view was widely shared among seventeenth- and early eighteenth-century theologians and natural philosophers, including figures connected to the Royal Society and the universities.
For Newton and his contemporaries, such as Locke and Daniel Whitby, belief in a future restoration functioned less as a statement about contemporary Jewish communities than as a theological response to deist critiques, reinforcing the messianic claims of Christianity through appeals to fulfilled and anticipated prophecy.
Newton and Robert Boyle's approach to mechanical philosophy was promoted by rationalist pamphleteers as a viable alternative to pantheism and enthusiasm.
It was accepted hesitantly by orthodox preachers as well as dissident preachers like the latitudinarians.
The clarity and simplicity of science was seen as a way to combat the emotional and metaphysical superlatives of both superstitious enthusiasm and the threat of atheism, and at the same time, the second wave of English deists used Newton's discoveries to demonstrate the possibility of a "Natural Religion".
The attacks made against pre-Enlightenment "magical thinking", and the mystical elements of Christianity, were given their foundation with Boyle's mechanical conception of the universe.
Newton gave Boyle's ideas their completion through mathematical proofs and, perhaps more importantly, was very successful in popularising them.
Of an estimated ten million words of writing in Newton's papers, about one million deal with alchemy.
Many of Newton's writings on alchemy are copies of other manuscripts, with his own annotations.
Alchemical texts mix artisanal knowledge with philosophical speculation, often hidden behind layers of wordplay, allegory, and imagery to protect craft secrets.
Some of the content contained in Newton's papers could have been considered heretical by the church.
In 1888, after spending sixteen years cataloguing Newton's papers, Cambridge University kept a small number and returned the rest to the Earl of Portsmouth.
In 1936, a descendant offered the papers for sale at Sotheby's.
The collection was broken up and sold for a total of about £9,000.
John Maynard Keynes was one of about three dozen bidders who obtained part of the collection at auction.
Keynes went on to reassemble an estimated half of Newton's collection of papers on alchemy before donating his collection to Cambridge University in 1946.
All of Newton's known writings on alchemy are currently being put online in a project undertaken by Indiana University: "The Chymistry of Isaac Newton" and has been summarised in a book.
Newton's fundamental contributions to science include the quantification of gravitational attraction, the discovery that white light is actually a mixture of immutable spectral colors, and the formulation of the calculus.
Yet there is another, more mysterious side to Newton that is imperfectly known, a realm of activity that spanned some thirty years of his life, although he kept it largely hidden from his contemporaries and colleagues.
We refer to Newton's involvement in the discipline of alchemy, or as it was often called in seventeenth-century England, "chymistry.
In June 2020, two unpublished pages of Newton's notes on Jan Baptist van Helmont's book on plague, De Peste, were being auctioned online by Bonhams.
Newton's analysis of this book, which he made in Cambridge while protecting himself from London's 1665–66 epidemic of the bubonic plague, is the most substantial written statement he is known to have made about the plague, according to Bonhams.
As far as the therapy is concerned, Newton writes that "the best is a toad suspended by the legs in a chimney for three days, which at last vomited up earth with various insects in it, on to a dish of yellow wax, and shortly after died.
Combining powdered toad with the excretions and serum made into lozenges and worn about the affected area drove away the contagion and drew out the poison".
The mathematician and physicist Joseph-Louis Lagrange frequently asserted that Newton was the greatest genius who ever lived, and once added that Newton was also "the most fortunate, for we cannot find more than once a system of the world to establish.
Nature, and Nature's laws lay hid in night.
God said, Let Newton be!
But this was not allowed to be inscribed in Newton's monument at Westminster.
ISAACUS NEWTON Eques Auratus, / Qui, animi vi prope divinâ, / Planetarum Motus, Figuras, / Cometarum semitas, Oceanique Aestus.
Suâ Mathesi facem praeferente / Primus demonstravit: / Radiorum Lucis dissimilitudines, / Colorumque inde nascentium proprietates, / Quas nemo antea vel suspicatus erat, pervestigavit.
Scripturae, / Sedulus, sagax, fidus Interpres / Dei O.
Majestatem Philosophiâ asseruit, / Evangelij Simplicitatem Moribus expressit.
Here is buried Isaac Newton, Knight, who by a strength of mind almost divine, and mathematical principles peculiarly his own, explored the course and figures of the planets, the paths of comets, the tides of the sea, the dissimilarities in rays of light, and, what no other scholar has previously imagined, the properties of the colours thus produced.
Diligent, sagacious and faithful, in his expositions of nature, antiquity and the holy Scriptures, he vindicated by his philosophy the majesty of God mighty and good, and expressed the simplicity of the Gospel in his manners.
Mortals rejoice that there has existed such and so great an ornament of the human race!
He was born on 25th December 1642, and died on 20th March 1726.
Science writer John G.
Simmons ranked Newton first in The Scientific 100, based on a qualitative assessment in which he ordered the scientists according to overall influence, and described him as "the most influential figure in the history of Western science".
Physicist Peter Rowlands described him as "the central figure in the history of science", who "more than anyone else is the source of our great confidence in the power of science.
The philosopher and historian David Hume also declared that Newton was "the greatest and rarest genius that ever arose for the ornament and instruction of the species".
In his home of Monticello, Thomas Jefferson, a Founding Father and President of the United States, kept portraits of John Locke, Sir Francis Bacon, and Newton, whom he described as "the three greatest men that have ever lived, without any exception", and who he credited with laying "the foundation of those superstructures which have been raised in the Physical and Moral sciences".
The writer and philosopher Voltaire wrote of Newton that "If all the geniuses of the universe were assembled, Newton should lead the band".
The neurologist and psychoanalyst Ernest Jones wrote of Newton as "the greatest genius of all times".
The mathematician Guillaume de l'Hôpital had a mythical reverence for Newton, which he expressed with a profound question and statement: "Does Mr.
Newton eat, or drink, or sleep like other men?
I represent him to myself as a celestial genius, entirely disengaged from matter.
Newton has further been called "the towering figure of the Scientific Revolution" and that "In a period rich with outstanding thinkers, Newton was simply the most outstanding.
In the polymath Vilfredo Pareto's estimation, Newton was the greatest human being who ever lived.
On the bicentennial of Newton's death in 1927, the astronomer James Jeans stated that he "was certainly the greatest man of science, and perhaps the greatest intellect, the human race has seen".
The physicist Peter Rowlands also notes that Newton was "possibly possessed of the most powerful intellect in the whole of human history".
Newton conceived four revolutions—in optics, mathematics, mechanics, and gravity—but also foresaw a fifth in electricity, though he lacked the time and energy in old age to fully accomplish it.
Newton's work is considered the most influential in bringing forth modern science.
The historian of science James Gleick noted that Newton "discovered more of the essential core of human knowledge than anyone before or after", and wrote further:He was chief architect of the modern world.
He answered the ancient philosophical riddles of light and motion, and he effectively discovered gravity.
He showed how to predict the courses of heavenly bodies and so established our place in the cosmos.
He made knowledge a thing of substance: quantitative and exact.
He established principles, and they are called his laws.
The physicist Ludwig Boltzmann called Newton's Principia "the first and greatest work ever written about theoretical physics".
Physicist Stephen Hawking similarly called Principia "probably the most important single work ever published in the physical sciences".
The mathematician and physicist Joseph-Louis Lagrange called Principia "the greatest production of the human mind", and noted that "he felt dazed at such an illustration of what man's intellect might be capable".
Physicist Edward Andrade stated that Newton "was capable of greater sustained mental effort than any man, before or since".
He also noted the place of Newton in history, stating:From time to time in the history of mankind a man arises who is of universal significance, whose work changes the current of human thought or of human experience, so that all that comes after him bears evidence of his spirit.
Such a man was Shakespeare, such a man was Beethoven, such a man was Newton, and, of the three, his kingdom is the most widespread.
Never was the supremacy of intellect so justly established and so fully confessed .
In mathematical and in experimental science without an equal and without an example; combining the genius for both in its highest degree.
Despite his rivalry with Gottfried Wilhem Leibniz, Leibniz still praised the work of Newton, with him responding to a question at a dinner in 1701 from Sophia Charlotte, the Queen of Prussia, about his view of Newton with:Taking mathematics from the beginning of the world to the time of when Newton lived, what he had done was much the better half.
Bell ranked Newton alongside Carl Friedrich Gauss and Archimedes as the three greatest mathematicians of all time, with the mathematician Donald M.
Davis also noting that Newton is generally ranked with the other two as the greatest mathematicians ever.
In his 1962 paper from the journal The Mathematics Teacher, the mathematician Walter Crosby Eells sought to objectively create a list that classified the most eminent mathematicians of all time; Newton was ranked first out of a list of the top 100, a position that was statistically confirmed even after taking probable error into account in the study.
In his book Wonders of Numbers in 2001, the science editor and author Clifford A.
Pickover ranked his top ten most influential mathematicians that ever lived, placing Newton first in the list.
In The Cambridge Companion to Isaac Newton (2016), he is described as being "from a very young age, an extraordinary problem-solver, as good, it would appear, as humanity has ever produced".
He is ultimately ranked among the top two or three greatest theoretical scientists ever, alongside James Clerk Maxwell and Albert Einstein, the greatest mathematician ever alongside Carl F.
Gauss, and in the first rank of experimentalists, thereby putting "Newton in a class by himself among empirical scientists, for one has trouble in thinking of any other candidate who was in the first rank of even two of these categories.
Gauss himself had Archimedes and Newton as his heroes, and used terms such as clarissimus or magnus to describe other intellectuals such as great mathematicians and philosophers, but reserved summus for Newton only, and once realising the immense influence of Newton's work on scientists such as Lagrange and Pierre-Simon Laplace, Gauss then exclaimed that "Newton remains forever the master of all masters!
In his book Great Physicists, the chemist William H.
On one assessment there should be no doubt: Newton was the greatest creative genius physics has ever seen.
None of the other candidates for the superlative (Einstein, Maxwell, Boltzmann, Gibbs, and Feynman) has matched Newton's combined achievements as theoretician, experimentalist, and mathematician.
Albert Einstein kept a picture of Newton on his study wall alongside ones of Michael Faraday and of James Clerk Maxwell.
Einstein stated that Newton's creation of calculus in relation to his laws of motion was "perhaps the greatest advance in thought that a single individual was ever privileged to make.
In 1999, an opinion poll of 100 of the day's leading physicists voted Einstein the "greatest physicist ever," with Newton the runner-up, while a parallel survey of rank-and-file physicists ranked Newton as the greatest.
In 2005, a dual survey of the public and members of Britain's Royal Society asked two questions: who made the bigger overall contributions to science and who made the bigger positive contributions to humankind, with the candidates being Newton or Einstein.
In both groups, and for both questions, the consensus was that Newton had made the greater overall contributions.
In 1999 Time magazine named Newton the Person of the Century for the 17th century.
Newton placed sixth in the 100 Greatest Britons poll conducted by BBC in 2002.
However, in 2003, he was voted as the greatest Briton in a poll conducted by BBC World, with Winston Churchill second.
He was voted as the greatest Cantabrigian by University of Cambridge students in 2009.
The physicist Lev Landau ranked physicists on a logarithmic scale of productivity and genius ranging from 0 to 5.
The highest ranking, 0, was assigned to Newton.
Einstein was ranked 0.
A rank of 1 was awarded to the fathers of quantum mechanics, such as Werner Heisenberg and Paul Dirac.
Landau, a Nobel prize winner and the discoverer of superfluidity, ranked himself as 2.
The SI derived unit of force is named the newton in his honour.
Most of Newton's surviving scientific and technical papers are kept at Cambridge University.
Cambridge University Library has the largest collection and there are also papers in Kings College, Trinity College, and the Fitzwilliam Museum.
There is an archive of theological and alchemical papers in the National Library of Israel, and smaller collections at the Smithsonian Institution, Stanford University Library, and the Huntington Library.
The Royal Society in London also has some manuscripts.
The Israel collection was inscribed by UNESCO on its Memory of the World International Register in 2015, recognising the global significance of the documents.
The Cambridge and Royal Society collections were added to this inscription in 2017.
Newton often told the story that he was inspired to formulate his theory of gravitation by watching the fall of an apple from a tree.
The story is believed to have passed into popular knowledge after being related by Catherine Barton, Newton's niece, to Voltaire.
Voltaire then wrote in his Essay on Epic Poetry (1727), "Sir Isaac Newton walking in his gardens, had the first thought of his system of gravitation, upon seeing an apple falling from a tree.
Although some question the veracity of the apple story, acquaintances of Newton attribute the story to Newton himself, though not the apocryphal version that the apple actually hit Newton's head.
In the year 1666 he retired again from Cambridge to his mother in Lincolnshire.
Whilst he was pensively meandering in a garden it came into his thought that the power of gravity (which brought an apple from a tree to the ground) was not limited to a certain distance from earth, but that this power must extend much further than was usually thought.
Why not as high as the Moon said he to himself & if so, that must influence her motion & perhaps retain her in her orbit, whereupon he fell a calculating what would be the effect of that supposition.
It is known from his notebooks that Newton was grappling in the late 1660s with the idea that terrestrial gravity extends, in an inverse-square proportion, to the Moon, as other scientists had already conjectured.
Around 1665, Newton made quantitative analysis, considering the period and distance of the Moon's orbit and considering the timing of objects falling on Earth.
Newton did not publish these results at the time because he could not prove that the Earth's gravity acts as if all its mass were concentrated at its center.
That proof took him twenty years.
Detailed analysis of historical accounts backed up by dendrochronology and DNA analysis indicate that the sole apple tree in a garden at Woolsthorpe Manor was the tree Newton described.
The tree blew over in at storm sometime around 1816, regrew from its roots, and continues as a tourist attraction under the care of the National Trust.
A descendant of the original tree can be seen growing outside the main gate of Trinity College, Cambridge, below the room Newton lived in when he studied there.
The National Fruit Collection at Brogdale in Kent can supply grafts from their tree, which appears identical to Flower of Kent, a coarse-fleshed cooking variety.
Newton's monument (1731) can be seen in Westminster Abbey, at the north of the entrance to the choir against the choir screen, near his tomb.
It was executed by the sculptor Michael Rysbrack (1694–1770) in white and grey marble with design by the architect William Kent.
The monument features a figure of Newton reclining on top of a sarcophagus, his right elbow resting on several of his great books and his left hand pointing to a scroll with a mathematical design.
Above him is a pyramid and a celestial globe showing the signs of the Zodiac and the path of the comet of 1680.
A relief panel depicts putti using instruments such as a telescope and prism.
From 1978 until 1988, an image of Newton designed by Harry Ecclestone appeared on Series D £1 banknotes issued by the Bank of England (the last £1 notes to be issued by the Bank of England).
Newton was shown on the reverse of the notes holding a book and accompanied by a telescope, a prism and a map of the Solar System.
A statue of Isaac Newton, looking at an apple at his feet, can be seen at the Oxford University Museum of Natural History.
A large bronze statue, Newton, after William Blake, by Eduardo Paolozzi, dated 1995 and inspired by William Blake's etching, dominates the piazza of the British Library in London.
A bronze statue of Newton was erected in 1858 in the centre of Grantham where he went to school, prominently standing in front of Grantham Guildhall.
The manor house at Woolsthorpe is a Grade I listed building by Historic England through being his birthplace and "where he discovered gravity and developed his theories regarding the refraction of light".
The Institute of Physics, or IOP, has its highest and most prestigious award, the Isaac Newton Medal, named after Newton, which is given for world-leading contributions to physics.
It was first awarded in 2008.
It is held by European philosophers of the Enlightenment and by historians of the Enlightenment that Newton's publication of the Principia was a turning point in the Scientific Revolution and started the Enlightenment.
It was Newton's conception of the universe based upon natural and rationally understandable laws that became one of the seeds for Enlightenment ideology.
John Locke and Voltaire applied concepts of natural law to political systems advocating intrinsic rights; the physiocrats and Adam Smith applied natural conceptions of psychology and self-interest to economic systems; and sociologists criticised the current social order for trying to fit history into natural models of progress.
James Burnett, Lord Monboddo and Samuel Clarke resisted elements of Newton's work, but eventually rationalised it to conform with their strong religious views of nature.
Of Natures Obvious Laws & Processes in Vegetation (unpublished, c.
Scala graduum Caloris.
Observations on Daniel and The Apocalypse of St.
UK National Archives.
Bernhardus Varenius, Geographia Generalis, ed.
Isaac Newton, 2nd ed.
Albert Einstein (14 March 1879 – 18 April 1955) was a German-born theoretical physicist best known for developing the theory of relativity.
Einstein also made important contributions to quantum theory.
His mass–energy equivalence formula E = mc2, which arises from special relativity, has been called "the world's most famous equation".
He received the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics for "his services to theoretical physics, and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect".
Born as a subject to the Kingdom of Württemberg, part of the German Empire, Einstein moved to Switzerland in 1895, forsaking his citizenship the following year.
In 1897, at the age of seventeen, he enrolled in the mathematics and physics teaching diploma program at the Swiss federal polytechnic school in Zurich, graduating in 1900.
He acquired Swiss citizenship a year later, which he kept for the rest of his life, and afterwards secured a permanent position at the Swiss Patent Office in Bern.
In 1905, he submitted a successful PhD dissertation to the University of Zurich.
In 1914, he moved to Berlin to join the Prussian Academy of Sciences and the Humboldt University of Berlin, becoming director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics in 1917; he also became a Prussian and consequently also German citizen again.
In 1933, while Einstein was visiting the United States, Adolf Hitler came to power in Germany.
Horrified by the Nazi persecution of his fellow Jews, he decided to remain in the US, and was granted American citizenship in 1940.
On the eve of World War II, he endorsed a letter to President Franklin D.
Roosevelt alerting him to the potential German nuclear weapons program and recommending that the US begin similar research, later carried out as the Manhattan Project.
In 1905, sometimes described as his annus mirabilis (miracle year), he published four groundbreaking papers.
In them, he outlined a theory of the photoelectric effect, explained Brownian motion, introduced his special theory of relativity, and demonstrated that if the special theory is correct, mass and energy are equivalent to each other.
In 1915, he proposed a general theory of relativity that extended his system of mechanics to incorporate gravitation.
A paper that he published the following year laid out the implications of general relativity for the modeling of the structure and evolution of the universe as a whole.
It introduced the cosmological constant and is further regarded as the first step in the field of modern theoretical cosmology.
In 1917, Einstein wrote a paper which introduced the concepts of spontaneous emission and stimulated emission, the latter of which is the core mechanism behind the laser and maser, and which contained a trove of information that would be beneficial to developments in physics later on, such as quantum electrodynamics and quantum optics.
In the middle part of his career, Einstein made important contributions to statistical mechanics and quantum theory.
Especially notable was his work on the quantum physics of radiation, in which light consists of particles, subsequently called photons.
With physicist Satyendra Nath Bose, he laid the groundwork for Bose–Einstein statistics.
For much of the last phase of his academic life, Einstein worked on two endeavors that ultimately proved unsuccessful.
First, he advocated against quantum theory's introduction of fundamental randomness into science's picture of the world, objecting that "God does not play dice".
Second, he attempted to devise a unified field theory by generalizing his geometric theory of gravitation to include electromagnetism.
As a result, he became increasingly isolated from mainstream modern physics.
Many things are named after him, including the element Einsteinium.
In 1999, he was named Time's Person of the Century.
Einstein was born in Ulm as a subject to the Kingdom of Württemberg in the German Empire on 14 March 1879.
His parents, secular Ashkenazi Jews, were Hermann Einstein, a salesman and engineer, and Pauline Koch.
In 1880, the family moved to Munich's borough of Ludwigsvorstadt-Isarvorstadt, where Einstein's father and his uncle Jakob founded Elektrotechnische Fabrik J.
Einstein & Cie, a company that manufactured electrical equipment based on direct current.
When he was very young, his parents worried that he had a learning disability because he was very slow to learn to talk.
When he was five and sick in bed, his father brought him a compass.
This sparked his lifelong fascination with electromagnetism.
He realized that "Something deeply hidden had to be behind things.
Einstein attended St.
Peter's Catholic elementary school in Munich from the age of five.
When he was eight, he was transferred to the Luitpold Gymnasium, where he received advanced primary and then secondary school education.
In 1894, Hermann and Jakob's company tendered for a contract to install electric lighting in Munich, but without success—they lacked the capital that would have been required to update their technology from direct current to the more efficient, alternating current alternative.
The failure of their bid forced them to sell their Munich factory and search for new opportunities elsewhere.
The Einstein family moved to Italy, first to Milan and a few months later to Pavia, where they settled in Palazzo Cornazzani.
Einstein, then fifteen, stayed behind in Munich in order to finish his schooling.
His father wanted him to study electrical engineering, but he was a fractious pupil who found the Gymnasium's regimen and teaching methods far from congenial.
He later wrote that the school's policy of strict rote learning was harmful to creativity.
At the end of December 1894, a letter from a doctor persuaded the Luitpold's authorities to release him from its care, and he joined his family in Pavia.
While in Italy as a teenager, he wrote an essay entitled "On the Investigation of the State of the Ether in a Magnetic Field".
Einstein excelled at physics and mathematics from an early age, and soon acquired the mathematical expertise normally only found in a child several years his senior.
He began teaching himself algebra, calculus and Euclidean geometry when he was twelve; he made such rapid progress that he discovered an original proof of the Pythagorean theorem before his thirteenth birthday.
A family tutor, Max Talmud, said that only a short time after he had given the twelve year old Einstein a geometry textbook, the boy "had worked through the whole book.
He thereupon devoted himself to higher mathematics .
Soon the flight of his mathematical genius was so high I could not follow.
His love of algebra and geometry was so great that at twelve, he was already confident that nature could be understood as a "mathematical structure".
At thirteen, when his range of enthusiasms had broadened to include music and philosophy, Talmud introduced Einstein to Kant's Critique of Pure Reason.
Kant became his favorite philosopher; according to Talmud, "At the time he was still a child, only thirteen years old, yet Kant's works, incomprehensible to ordinary mortals, seemed to be clear to him.
In 1895, at the age of sixteen, Einstein sat the entrance examination for the federal polytechnic school (later the Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule, ETH) in Zurich, Switzerland.
He failed to reach the required standard in the general part of the test, but performed with distinction in physics and mathematics.
On the advice of the polytechnic's principal, he completed his secondary education at the Argovian cantonal school (a gymnasium) in Aarau, Switzerland, graduating in 1896.
While lodging in Aarau with the family of Jost Winteler, he fell in love with Winteler's daughter, Marie.
In January 1896, with his father's approval, Einstein renounced his citizenship of the German Kingdom of Württemberg in order to avoid conscription into military service.
The Matura (graduation for the successful completion of higher secondary schooling), awarded to him in September 1896, acknowledged him to have performed well across most of the curriculum, allotting him a top grade of 6 for history, physics, algebra, geometry, and descriptive geometry.
At seventeen, he enrolled in the four-year mathematics and physics teaching diploma program at the federal polytechnic school.
He befriended fellow student Marcel Grossmann, who would help him there to get by despite his loose study habits, and later to mathematically underpin his revolutionary insights into physics.
Marie Winteler, a year older than him, took up a teaching post in Olsberg, Switzerland.
The five other polytechnic school freshmen following the same course as Einstein included just one woman, a twenty year old Serbian, Mileva Marić.
Over the next few years, the pair spent many hours discussing their shared interests and learning about topics in physics that the polytechnic school's lectures did not cover.
In his letters to Marić, Einstein confessed that exploring science with her by his side was much more enjoyable than reading a textbook in solitude.
Eventually the two students became not only friends, but also lovers.
Historians of physics are divided on the question of the extent to which Marić contributed to the insights of Einstein's annus mirabilis publications.
There is at least some evidence that he was influenced by her scientific ideas, but there are scholars who doubt whether her impact on his thought was of any great significance at all.
Correspondence between Einstein and Marić, discovered and published in 1987, revealed that the couple had a daughter named Lieserl.
She was born in early 1902 while Marić was visiting her parents in Novi Sad.
When Marić returned to Switzerland the child was no longer with her.
What happened to Lieserl is uncertain.
In a letter written in September 1903, Einstein suggested that the girl was either given up for adoption or died of scarlet fever in infancy.
Einstein and Marić married in January 1903.
In May 1904, their son Hans Albert was born in Bern, Switzerland.
Their son Eduard was born in Zurich in July 1910.
In letters that Einstein wrote to Marie Winteler in the months before Eduard's arrival, he described his love for his wife as "misguided" and mourned the "missed life" that he imagined he would have enjoyed if he had married Winteler instead: "I think of you in heartfelt love every spare minute and am so unhappy as only a man can be.
In 1912, Einstein entered into a relationship with Elsa Löwenthal, who was both his first cousin on his mother's side and his second cousin on his father's.
When Marić learned of his infidelity soon after moving to Berlin with him in April 1914, she returned to Zurich, taking Hans Albert and Eduard with her.
Einstein and Marić were granted a divorce on 14 February 1919 on the grounds of having lived apart for five years.
As part of the divorce settlement, Einstein agreed that if he were to win a Nobel Prize, he would give the money that he received to Marić; he won the prize two years later.
Einstein married Löwenthal in 1919.
In 1923, he began a relationship with a secretary named Betty Neumann, the niece of his close friend Hans Mühsam.
Löwenthal nevertheless remained loyal to him, accompanying him when he emigrated to the United States in 1933.
In 1935, she was diagnosed with heart and kidney problems.
She died in December 1936.
A volume of Einstein's letters released by Hebrew University of Jerusalem in 2006 added some other women with whom he was romantically involved.
They included Margarete Lebach (a married Austrian), Estella Katzenellenbogen (the rich owner of a florist business), Toni Mendel (a wealthy Jewish widow) and Ethel Michanowski (a Berlin socialite), with whom he spent time and from whom he accepted gifts while married to Löwenthal.
After being widowed, Einstein was briefly in a relationship with Margarita Konenkova, thought by some to be a Russian spy; her husband, the Russian sculptor Sergei Konenkov, created the bronze bust of Einstein at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton.
Following an episode of acute mental illness at about the age of twenty, Einstein's son Eduard was diagnosed with schizophrenia.
He spent the remainder of his life either in the care of his mother or in temporary confinement in an asylum.
After her death, he was committed permanently to Burghölzli, the Psychiatric University Hospital in Zurich.
Einstein graduated from the federal polytechnic school in 1900, duly certified as competent to teach mathematics and physics.
His successful acquisition of Swiss citizenship in February 1901 was not followed by the usual sequel of conscription; the Swiss authorities deemed him medically unfit for military service.
He found that Swiss schools too appeared to have no use for him, failing to offer him a teaching position despite the almost two years that he spent applying for one.
Eventually it was with the help of Marcel Grossmann's father that he secured a post in Bern at the Swiss Patent Office, as an assistant examiner – level III.
Patent applications that landed on Einstein's desk for his evaluation included ideas for a gravel sorter and an electric typewriter.
His employers were pleased enough with his work to make his position permanent in 1903, although they did not think that he should be promoted until he had "fully mastered machine technology".
It is conceivable that his labors at the patent office had a bearing on his development of his special theory of relativity.
He arrived at his revolutionary ideas about space, time and light through thought experiments about the transmission of signals and the synchronization of clocks, matters which also figured in some of the inventions submitted to him for assessment.
In 1902, Einstein and some friends whom he had met in Bern formed a group that held regular meetings to discuss science and philosophy.
Their choice of a name for their club, the Olympia Academy, was an ironic comment upon its far from Olympian status.
Sometimes they were joined by Marić, who limited her participation in their proceedings to careful listening.
The thinkers whose works they reflected upon included Henri Poincaré, Ernst Mach and David Hume, all of whom significantly influenced Einstein's own subsequent ideas and beliefs.
Einstein's first paper, "Folgerungen aus den Capillaritätserscheinungen" ("Conclusions drawn from the phenomena of capillarity"), in which he proposed a model of intermolecular attraction that he afterwards disavowed as worthless, was published in the journal Annalen der Physik in 1901.
His 24-page doctoral dissertation also addressed a topic in molecular physics.
Titled "Eine neue Bestimmung der Moleküldimensionen" ("A New Determination of Molecular Dimensions") and dedicated "Meinem Freunde Herr Dr.
Marcel Grossmann gewidmet" (to his friend Marcel Grossman), it was completed on 30 April 1905 and approved by Professor Alfred Kleiner of the University of Zurich three months later.
The publications deeply impressed Einstein's contemporaries.
Einstein's sabbatical as a civil servant approached its end in 1908, when he secured a junior teaching position at the University of Bern.
In 1909, a lecture on relativistic electrodynamics that he gave at the University of Zurich, much admired by Alfred Kleiner, led to Zurich's luring him away from Bern with a newly created associate professorship.
Promotion to a full professorship followed in April 1911, when he took up a chair at the German Charles-Ferdinand University in Prague, a move which required him to become an Austrian citizen of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, which was not completed.
His time in Prague saw him producing eleven research papers.
From 30 October to 3 November 1911, Einstein attended the first Solvay Conference on Physics.
In July 1912, he returned to his alma mater, the ETH Zurich, to take up a chair in theoretical physics.
His teaching activities there centered on thermodynamics and analytical mechanics, and his research interests included the molecular theory of heat, continuum mechanics and the development of a relativistic theory of gravitation.
In his work on the latter topic, he was assisted by his friend Marcel Grossmann, whose knowledge of the kind of mathematics required was greater than his own.
In the spring of 1913, two German visitors, Max Planck and Walther Nernst, called upon Einstein in Zurich in the hope of persuading him to relocate to Berlin.
They offered him membership of the Prussian Academy of Sciences, the directorship of the planned Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics and a chair at the Humboldt University of Berlin that would allow him to pursue his research supported by a professorial salary but with no teaching duties to burden him.
Their invitation was all the more appealing to him because Berlin happened to be the home of his latest girlfriend, Elsa Löwenthal.
He duly joined the Academy on 24 July 1913, and moved into an apartment in the Berlin district of Dahlem on 1 April 1914.
He was installed in his Humboldt University position shortly thereafter.
The outbreak of the First World War in July 1914 marked the beginning of Einstein's gradual estrangement from the nation of his birth.
When the "Manifesto of the Ninety-Three" was published in October 1914—a document signed by a host of prominent German thinkers that justified Germany's belligerence—Einstein was one of the few German intellectuals to distance himself from it and sign the alternative, irenic "Manifesto to the Europeans" instead.
However, this expression of his doubts about German policy did not prevent him from being elected to a two-year term as president of the German Physical Society in 1916.
When the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics opened its doors the following year—its foundation delayed because of the war—Einstein was appointed its first director, just as Planck and Nernst had promised.
Einstein was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1920, and a Foreign Member of the Royal Society in 1921.
In 1922, he was awarded the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics "for his services to Theoretical Physics, and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect".
At this point some physicists still regarded the general theory of relativity skeptically, and the Nobel citation displayed a degree of doubt even about the work on photoelectricity that it acknowledged: it did not assent to Einstein's notion of the particulate nature of light, which only won over the entire scientific community when S.
Bose derived the Planck spectrum in 1924.
That same year, Einstein was elected an International Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
Britain's closest equivalent of the Nobel award, the Royal Society's Copley Medal, was not hung around Einstein's neck until 1925.
He was elected an International Member of the American Philosophical Society in 1930.
Einstein resigned from the Prussian Academy in March 1933.
His accomplishments in Berlin had included the completion of the general theory of relativity, proving the Einstein–de Haas effect, contributing to the quantum theory of radiation, and the development of Bose–Einstein statistics.
In 1907, Einstein reached a milestone on his long journey from his special theory of relativity to a new idea of gravitation with the formulation of his equivalence principle, which asserts that an observer in a box falling freely in a gravitational field would be unable to find any evidence that the field exists.
In 1911, he first calculated the gravitational deflection of light passing close to the Sun, a prediction later adjusted upon completion of the general theory of relativity.
He reworked his calculation in 1913, having now found a way to model gravitation with the Riemann curvature tensor of a non-Euclidean four-dimensional spacetime.
By the fall of 1915, his reimagining of the mathematics of gravitation in terms of Riemannian geometry was complete, and he applied his new theory not just to the behavior of the Sun as a gravitational lens but also to another astronomical phenomenon, the precession of the perihelion of Mercury (a slow drift in the point in Mercury's elliptical orbit at which it approaches the Sun most closely).
A total eclipse of the Sun that took place on 29 May 1919 provided an opportunity to put his theory of gravitational lensing to the test, and observations performed by Sir Arthur Eddington yielded results that were consistent with his calculations.
Eddington's work was reported at length in newspapers around the world.
On 7 November 1919, for example, the leading British newspaper, The Times, printed a banner headline that read: "Revolution in Science – New Theory of the Universe – Newtonian Ideas Overthrown".
With Eddington's eclipse observations widely reported not just in academic journals but by the popular press as well, Einstein became "perhaps the world's first celebrity scientist", a genius who had shattered a paradigm that had been basic to physicists' understanding of the universe since the seventeenth century.
Einstein began his new life as an intellectual icon in America, where he arrived on 2 April 1921.
He was welcomed to New York City by Mayor John Francis Hylan, and then spent three weeks giving lectures and attending receptions.
He spoke several times at Columbia University and Princeton, and in Washington, he visited the White House with representatives of the National Academy of Sciences.
He returned to Europe via London, where he was the guest of the philosopher and statesman Viscount Haldane.
He used his time in the British capital to meet several people prominent in British scientific, political or intellectual life, and to deliver a lecture at King's College.
In July 1921, he published an essay, "My First Impression of the U.
He wrote of his transatlantic hosts in highly approving terms: "What strikes a visitor is the joyous, positive attitude to life .
The American is friendly, self-confident, optimistic, and without envy.
In 1922, Einstein's travels were to the old world rather than the new.
He devoted six months to a tour of Asia that saw him speaking in Japan, Singapore and Sri Lanka (then known as Ceylon).
After his first public lecture in Tokyo, he met Emperor Yoshihito and his wife at the Imperial Palace, with thousands of spectators thronging the streets in the hope of catching a glimpse of him.
But his picture of them in his diary was less flattering: "[the] intellectual needs of this nation seem to be weaker than their artistic ones – natural disposition?
Of Chinese people, he wrote that "even the children are spiritless and look obtuse.
It would be a pity if these Chinese supplant all other races.
For the likes of us the mere thought is unspeakably dreary".
Sir Herbert Samuel, the British High Commissioner, welcomed him with a degree of ceremony normally only accorded to a visiting head of state, including a cannon salute.
One reception held in his honor was stormed by people determined to hear him speak: he told them that he was happy that Jews were beginning to be recognized as a force in the world.
On April 6, 1922, during a visit to Paris, Einstein engaged in a debate on relativity with the philosopher Henri Bergson.
This dispute has had widespread ramifications for the humanities and was an academic cause célèbre at the time.
Einstein's decision to tour the eastern hemisphere in 1922 meant that he was unable to go to Stockholm in the December of that year to participate in the Nobel prize ceremony.
His place at the traditional Nobel banquet was taken by a German diplomat, who gave a speech praising him not only as a physicist but also as a campaigner for peace.
A two-week visit to Spain that he undertook in 1923 saw him collecting another award, a membership of the Spanish Academy of Sciences signified by a diploma handed to him by King Alfonso XIII.
From 1922 until 1932, with the exception of a few months in 1923 and 1924, Einstein was a member of the Geneva-based International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation of the League of Nations, a group set up by the League to encourage scientists, artists, scholars, teachers and other people engaged in the life of the mind to work more closely with their counterparts in other countries.
He was appointed as a German delegate rather than as a representative of Switzerland because of the machinations of two Catholic activists, Oskar Halecki and Giuseppe Motta.
By persuading Secretary General Eric Drummond to deny Einstein the place on the committee reserved for a Swiss thinker, they created an opening for Gonzague de Reynold, who used his League of Nations position as a platform from which to promote traditional Catholic doctrine.
Einstein's former physics professor Hendrik Lorentz and the Polish chemist Marie Curie were also members of the committee.
In March and April 1925, Einstein and his wife visited South America, where they spent about a week in Brazil, a week in Uruguay and a month in Argentina.
Their tour was suggested by Jorge Duclout (1856–1927) and Mauricio Nirenstein (1877–1935) with the support of several Argentine scholars, including Julio Rey Pastor, Jakob Laub, and Leopoldo Lugones and was financed primarily by the Council of the University of Buenos Aires and the Asociación Hebraica Argentina (Argentine Hebraic Association) with a smaller contribution from the Argentine-Germanic Cultural Institution.
In December 1930, Einstein began another significant sojourn in the United States, drawn back to the US by the offer of a two month research fellowship at the California Institute of Technology.
Caltech supported him in his wish that he should not be exposed to quite as much attention from the media as he had experienced when visiting the US in 1921, and he therefore declined all the invitations to receive prizes or make speeches that his admirers poured down upon him.
But he remained willing to allow his fans at least some of the time with him that they requested.
After arriving in New York City, Einstein was taken to various places and events, including Chinatown, a lunch with the editors of The New York Times, and a performance of Carmen at the Metropolitan Opera, where he was cheered by the audience on his arrival.
During the days following, he was given the keys to the city by Mayor Jimmy Walker and met Nicholas Murray Butler, the president of Columbia University, who described Einstein as "the ruling monarch of the mind".
Harry Emerson Fosdick, pastor at New York's Riverside Church, gave Einstein a tour of the church and showed him a full-size statue that the church made of Einstein, standing at the entrance.
Also during his stay in New York, he joined a crowd of 15,000 people at Madison Square Garden during a Hanukkah celebration.
Einstein next traveled to California, where he met Caltech president and Nobel laureate Robert A.
His friendship with Millikan was "awkward", as Millikan "had a penchant for patriotic militarism", where Einstein was a pronounced pacifist.
During an address to Caltech's students, Einstein noted that science was often inclined to do more harm than good.
This aversion to war also led Einstein to befriend author Upton Sinclair and film star Charlie Chaplin, both noted for their pacifism.
Carl Laemmle, head of Universal Studios, gave Einstein a tour of his studio and introduced him to Chaplin.
They had an instant rapport, with Chaplin inviting Einstein and his wife, Elsa, to his home for dinner.
Chaplin said Einstein's outward persona, calm and gentle, seemed to conceal a "highly emotional temperament", from which came his "extraordinary intellectual energy".
Chaplin's film City Lights was to premiere a few days later in Hollywood, and Chaplin invited Einstein and Elsa to join him as his special guests.
Walter Isaacson, Einstein's biographer, described this as "one of the most memorable scenes in the new era of celebrity".
Chaplin visited Einstein at his home on a later trip to Berlin and recalled his "modest little flat" and the piano at which he had begun writing his theory.
Chaplin speculated that it was "possibly used as kindling wood by the Nazis".
Einstein and Chaplin were cheered at the premiere of the film.
Chaplin said to Einstein, "They cheer me because they understand me, and they cheer you because no one understands you.
In February 1933, while on a visit to the United States, Einstein knew he could not return to Germany with the rise to power of the Nazis under Germany's new chancellor, Adolf Hitler.
While at American universities in early 1933, he undertook his third two-month visiting professorship at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena.
In February and March 1933, the Gestapo repeatedly raided his family's apartment in Berlin.
He and his wife Elsa returned to Europe in March, and during the trip, they learned that the German Reichstag had passed the Enabling Act on 23 March, transforming Hitler's government into a de facto legal dictatorship, and that they would not be able to proceed to Berlin.
Later on, they heard that their cottage had been raided by the Nazis and Einstein's personal sailboat confiscated.
Upon landing in Antwerp, Belgium on 28 March, Einstein immediately went to the German consulate and surrendered his passport, formally renouncing his German citizenship.
The renunciation was at first refused, but the Nazi government finally revoked his citizenship on 24 March 1934.
The Nazis later sold his boat and converted his cottage into a Hitler Youth camp.
In April 1933, Einstein discovered that the new German government had passed laws barring Jews from holding any official positions, including teaching at universities.
Historian Gerald Holton describes how, with "virtually no audible protest being raised by their colleagues", thousands of Jewish scientists were suddenly forced to give up their university positions and their names were removed from the rolls of institutions where they were employed.
A month later, Einstein's works were among those targeted by the German Student Union in the Nazi book burnings, with Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels proclaiming, "Jewish intellectualism is dead.
In a subsequent letter to physicist and friend Max Born, who had already emigrated from Germany to England, Einstein wrote, ".
I must confess that the degree of their brutality and cowardice came as something of a surprise.
Einstein was now without a permanent home, unsure where he would live and work, and equally worried about the fate of countless other scientists still in Germany.
Aided by the Academic Assistance Council, founded in April 1933 by British Liberal politician William Beveridge to help academics escape Nazi persecution, Einstein was able to leave Germany.
He rented a house in De Haan, Belgium, where he lived for a few months.
In late July 1933, he visited England for about six weeks at the invitation of the British Member of Parliament Commander Oliver Locker-Lampson, who had become friends with him in the preceding years.
Locker-Lampson invited him to stay near his Cromer home in a secluded wooden cabin on Roughton Heath in the Parish of Roughton, Norfolk.
To protect Einstein, Locker-Lampson had two bodyguards watch over him; a photo of them carrying shotguns and guarding Einstein was published in the Daily Herald on 24 July 1933.
Locker-Lampson took Einstein to meet Winston Churchill at his home, and later, Austen Chamberlain and former Prime Minister Lloyd George.
Einstein asked them to help bring Jewish scientists out of Germany.
British historian Martin Gilbert notes that Churchill responded immediately, and sent his friend physicist Frederick Lindemann to Germany to seek out Jewish scientists and place them in British universities.
Churchill later observed that as a result of Germany having driven the Jews out, they had lowered their "technical standards" and put the Allies' technology ahead of theirs.
Einstein later contacted leaders of other nations, including Turkey's Prime Minister, İsmet İnönü, to whom he wrote in September 1933, requesting placement of unemployed German-Jewish scientists.
As a result of Einstein's letter, Jewish invitees to Turkey eventually totaled over "1,000 saved individuals".
Locker-Lampson also submitted a bill to parliament to extend British citizenship to Einstein, during which period Einstein made a number of public appearances describing the crisis brewing in Europe.
In one of his speeches he denounced Germany's treatment of Jews, while at the same time he introduced a bill promoting Jewish citizenship in Palestine, as they were being denied citizenship elsewhere.
In his speech he described Einstein as a "citizen of the world" who should be offered a temporary shelter in the UK.
Both bills failed, however, and Einstein then accepted an earlier offer from the Institute for Advanced Study, in Princeton, New Jersey, US, to become a resident scholar.
On 3 October 1933, Einstein delivered a speech on the importance of academic freedom before a packed audience at the Royal Albert Hall in London, with The Times reporting he was wildly cheered throughout.
Four days later he returned to the US and took up a position at the Institute for Advanced Study, noted for having become a refuge for scientists fleeing Nazi Germany.
At the time, most American universities, including Harvard, Princeton and Yale, had minimal or no Jewish faculty or students, as a result of their Jewish quotas, which lasted until the late 1940s.
Einstein was still undecided about his future.
He had offers from several European universities, including Christ Church, Oxford, where he stayed for three short periods between May 1931 and June 1933 and was offered a five-year research fellowship (called a "studentship" at Christ Church), but in 1935, he arrived at the decision to remain permanently in the United States and apply for citizenship.
Einstein's affiliation with the Institute for Advanced Study would last until his death in 1955.
He was one of the four first selected (along with John von Neumann, Kurt Gödel and Hermann Weyl) at the new Institute.
He soon developed a close friendship with Gödel; the two would take long walks together discussing their work.
Bruria Kaufman, his assistant, later became a physicist.
During this period, Einstein tried to develop a unified field theory and to refute the accepted interpretation of quantum physics, both unsuccessfully.
He lived in Princeton at his home from 1935 onwards.
The Albert Einstein House was made a National Historic Landmark in 1976.
In 1939, a group of Hungarian scientists that included émigré physicist Leó Szilárd attempted to alert Washington, D.
The group's warnings were discounted.
Einstein and Szilárd, along with other refugees such as Edward Teller and Eugene Wigner, "regarded it as their responsibility to alert Americans to the possibility that German scientists might win the race to build an atomic bomb, and to warn that Hitler would be more than willing to resort to such a weapon.
He was asked to lend his support by writing a letter, with Szilárd, to President Franklin D.
Roosevelt, recommending the US pay attention and engage in its own nuclear weapons research.
The letter is believed to be "arguably the key stimulus for the U.
In addition to the letter, Einstein used his connections with the Belgian royal family and the Belgian queen mother to get access with a personal envoy to the White House's Oval Office.
Some say that as a result of Einstein's letter and his meetings with Roosevelt, the US entered the "race" to develop the bomb, drawing on its "immense material, financial, and scientific resources" to initiate the Manhattan Project.
For Einstein, "war was a disease .
In 1954, a year before his death, Einstein said to his old friend, Linus Pauling, "I made one great mistake in my life—when I signed the letter to President Roosevelt recommending that atom bombs be made; but there was some justification—the danger that the Germans would make them .
In 1960 Einstein was included posthumously as a charter member of the World Academy of Art and Science (WAAS), an organization founded by distinguished scientists and intellectuals who committed themselves to the responsible and ethical advances of science, particularly in light of the development of nuclear weapons.
Einstein became an American citizen in 1940.
Not long after settling into his career at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, he expressed his appreciation of the meritocracy in American culture compared to Europe.
He recognized the "right of individuals to say and think what they pleased" without social barriers.
As a result, individuals were encouraged, he said, to be more creative, a trait he valued from his early education.
Einstein joined the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in Princeton, where he campaigned for the civil rights of African Americans.
He considered racism America's "worst disease", seeing it as "handed down from one generation to the next".
As part of his involvement, he corresponded with civil rights activist W.
Du Bois and was prepared to testify on his behalf during his trial as an alleged foreign agent in 1951.
When Einstein offered to be a character witness for Du Bois, the judge decided to drop the case.
In 1946, Einstein visited Lincoln University in Pennsylvania, a historically black college, where he was awarded an honorary degree.
Lincoln was the first university in the United States to grant college degrees to African Americans; alumni include Langston Hughes and Thurgood Marshall.
Einstein gave a speech about racism in America, adding, "I do not intend to be quiet about it.
Einstein has said, "Being a Jew myself, perhaps I can understand and empathize with how black people feel as victims of discrimination".
Isaacson writes that "When Marian Anderson, the black contralto, came to Princeton for a concert in 1937, the Nassau Inn refused her a room.
So Einstein invited her to stay at his house on Main Street, in what was a deeply personal as well as symbolic gesture .
Whenever she returned to Princeton, she stayed with Einstein, her last visit coming just two months before he died.
In 1918, Einstein was one of the signatories of the founding proclamation of the German Democratic Party, a liberal party.
Later in his life, Einstein's political view was in favor of socialism and critical of capitalism, which he detailed in his essays such as "Why Socialism?
His opinions on the Bolsheviks also changed with time.
In 1925, he criticized them for not having a "well-regulated system of government" and called their rule a "regime of terror and a tragedy in human history".
In Lenin I honor a man, who in total sacrifice of his own person has committed his entire energy to realizing social justice.
I do not find his methods advisable.
One thing is certain, however: men like him are the guardians and renewers of mankind's conscience.
Einstein offered and was called on to give judgments and opinions on matters often unrelated to theoretical physics or mathematics.
He strongly advocated the idea of a democratic global government that would check the power of nation-states in the framework of a world federation.
He wrote "I advocate world government because I am convinced that there is no other possible way of eliminating the most terrible danger in which man has ever found himself.
Einstein was deeply impressed by Mahatma Gandhi, with whom he corresponded.
He described Gandhi as "a role model for the generations to come".
The initial connection was established on 27 September 1931, when Wilfrid Israel took his Indian guest V.
Sundaram to meet his friend Einstein at his summer home in the town of Caputh.
Sundaram was Gandhi's disciple and special envoy, whom Wilfrid Israel met while visiting India and visiting the Indian leader's home in 1925.
During the visit, Einstein wrote a short letter to Gandhi that was delivered to him through his envoy, and Gandhi responded quickly with his own letter.
Although in the end Einstein and Gandhi were unable to meet as they had hoped, the direct connection between them was established through Wilfrid Israel.
I should unconditionally refuse every direct or indirect war service and try to induce my friends to adopt the same attitude, irrespective of the general opinion of the causes of war.
Einstein, a Jew, was a figurehead leader in the establishment of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, which opened in 1925.
Earlier, in 1921, he was asked by the biochemist and president of the World Zionist Organization, Chaim Weizmann, to help raise funds for the planned university.
He made suggestions for the creation of an Institute of Agriculture, a Chemical Institute and an Institute of Microbiology in order to fight the various ongoing epidemics such as malaria, which he called an "evil" that was undermining a third of the country's development.
He also promoted the establishment of an Oriental Studies Institute, to include language courses given in both Hebrew and Arabic.
Einstein was not a nationalist and opposed the creation of an independent Jewish state.
He felt that the waves of arriving Jews of the Aliyah could live alongside existing Arabs in Palestine.
The state of Israel was established without his help in 1948; Einstein was limited to a marginal role in the Zionist movement.
Afterward, Einstein adopted a practical attitude, understanding that "there is no going back", and the new state must be supported.
Upon the death of Israeli president Weizmann in November 1952, Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion offered Einstein the largely ceremonial position of President of Israel at the urging of Ezriel Carlebach.
The offer was presented by Israel's ambassador in Washington, Abba Eban, who explained that the offer "embodies the deepest respect which the Jewish people can repose in any of its sons".
Einstein wrote that he was "deeply moved", but "at once saddened and ashamed" that he could not accept it.
Einstein did not want the office, and the Israeli government did not want him to accept, but felt obliged to make the offer.
Yitzhak Navon, Ben-Gurion's political secretary, and later president, reports Ben-Gurion as saying "Tell me what to do if he says yes!
I've had to offer the post to him because it's impossible not to.
But if he accepts, we are in for trouble.
Per Lee Smolin, "I believe what allowed Einstein to achieve so much was primarily a moral quality.
He simply cared far more than most of his colleagues that the laws of physics have to explain everything in nature coherently and consistently.
He said he had sympathy for the impersonal pantheistic God of Baruch Spinoza's philosophy.
He did not believe in a personal god who concerns himself with fates and actions of human beings, a view which he described as naïve.
He clarified, however, that "I am not an atheist", preferring to call himself an agnostic, or a "deeply religious nonbeliever".
He wrote that "A spirit is manifest in the laws of the universe—a spirit vastly superior to that of man, and one in the face of which we with our modest powers must feel humble.
In this way the pursuit of science leads to a religious feeling of a special sort.
Einstein was primarily affiliated with non-religious humanist and Ethical Culture groups in both the UK and US.
He served on the advisory board of the First Humanist Society of New York, and was an honorary associate of the Rationalist Association, which publishes New Humanist in Britain.
For the 75th anniversary of the New York Society for Ethical Culture, he stated that the idea of Ethical Culture embodied his personal conception of what is most valuable and enduring in religious idealism.
He observed, "Without 'ethical culture' there is no salvation for humanity.
The word God is for me nothing more than the expression and product of human weaknesses, the Bible a collection of honorable, but still primitive legends which are nevertheless pretty childish.
No interpretation no matter how subtle can (for me) change this.
For me the Jewish religion like all other religions is an incarnation of the most childish superstitions.
And the Jewish people to whom I gladly belong and with whose mentality I have a deep affinity have no different quality for me than all other people.
I cannot see anything 'chosen' about them.
Einstein had been sympathetic toward vegetarianism for a long time.
Although I have been prevented by outward circumstances from observing a strictly vegetarian diet, I have long been an adherent to the cause in principle.
Besides agreeing with the aims of vegetarianism for aesthetic and moral reasons, it is my view that a vegetarian manner of living by its purely physical effect on the human temperament would most beneficially influence the lot of mankind.
He became a vegetarian himself only during the last part of his life.
In March 1954 he wrote in a letter: "So I am living without fats, without meat, without fish, but am feeling quite well this way.
It almost seems to me that man was not born to be a carnivore.
Einstein developed an appreciation for music at an early age.
If I were not a physicist, I would probably be a musician.
I often think in music.
I live my daydreams in music.
I see my life in terms of music .
I get most joy in life out of music.
His mother played the piano reasonably well and wanted her son to learn the violin, not only to instill in him a love of music but also to help him assimilate into German culture.
According to conductor Leon Botstein, Einstein began playing when he was 5.
However, he did not enjoy it at that age.
When he turned 13, he discovered Mozart's violin sonatas, whereupon he became enamored of Mozart's compositions and studied music more willingly.
Einstein taught himself to play without "ever practicing systematically".
He said that "love is a better teacher than a sense of duty".
At the age of 17, he was heard by a school examiner in Aarau while playing Beethoven's violin sonatas.
The examiner stated afterward that his playing was "remarkable and revealing of 'great insight'".
What struck the examiner, writes Botstein, was that Einstein "displayed a deep love of the music, a quality that was and remains in short supply.
Music possessed an unusual meaning for this student.
Music took on a pivotal and permanent role in Einstein's life from that period on.
Although the idea of becoming a professional musician himself was not on his mind at any time, among those with whom Einstein played chamber music were a few professionals, including Kurt Appelbaum, and he performed for private audiences and friends.
Chamber music had also become a regular part of his social life while living in Bern, Zurich, and Berlin, where he played with Max Planck and his son, among others.
He is sometimes erroneously credited as the editor of the 1937 edition of the Köchel catalog of Mozart's work; that edition was prepared by Alfred Einstein, who may have been a distant relation.
Mozart was a special favorite; he said that "Mozart's music is so pure it seems to have been ever-present in the universe.
In 1931, while engaged in research at the California Institute of Technology, he visited the Zoellner family conservatory in Los Angeles, where he played some of Beethoven and Mozart's works with members of the Zoellner Quartet.
Near the end of his life, when the young Juilliard Quartet visited him in Princeton, he played his violin with them, and the quartet was "impressed by Einstein's level of coordination and intonation".
On 17 April 1955, Einstein experienced internal bleeding caused by the rupture of an abdominal aortic aneurysm, which had previously been reinforced surgically by Rudolph Nissen in 1948.
He took the draft of a speech he was preparing for a television appearance commemorating the state of Israel's seventh anniversary with him to the hospital, but he did not live to complete it.
Einstein refused surgery, saying, "I want to go when I want.
It is tasteless to prolong life artificially.
I have done my share; it is time to go.
I will do it elegantly.
During the autopsy, the pathologist Thomas Stoltz Harvey removed Einstein's brain for preservation without the permission of his family, in the hope that the neuroscience of the future would be able to discover what made Einstein so intelligent.
Einstein's remains were cremated in Trenton, New Jersey, and his ashes were scattered at an undisclosed location.
In a memorial lecture delivered on 13 December 1965 at UNESCO headquarters, nuclear physicist J.
Robert Oppenheimer summarized his impression of Einstein as a person: "He was almost wholly without sophistication and wholly without worldliness .
There was always with him a wonderful purity at once childlike and profoundly stubborn.
Einstein bequeathed his personal archives, library, and intellectual assets to the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in Israel.
Throughout his life, Einstein published hundreds of books and articles.
He published more than 300 scientific papers and 150 non-scientific ones.
On 5 December 2014, universities and archives announced the release of Einstein's papers, comprising more than 30,000 unique documents.
In addition to the work he did by himself, he also collaborated with other scientists on additional projects, including the Bose–Einstein statistics, the Einstein refrigerator and others.
Einstein's first paper, submitted in 1900 to Annalen der Physik, was on capillary attraction.
It was published in 1901 with the title "Folgerungen aus den Capillaritätserscheinungen", which translates as "Conclusions from the capillarity phenomena".
Two papers he published in 1902–1903 (thermodynamics) attempted to interpret atomic phenomena from a statistical point of view.
These papers were the foundation for the 1905 paper on Brownian motion, which showed that Brownian movement can be construed as firm evidence that molecules exist.
His research in 1903 and 1904 was mainly concerned with the effect of finite atomic size on diffusion phenomena.
Einstein returned to the problem of thermodynamic fluctuations, giving a treatment of the density variations in a fluid at its critical point.
Ordinarily, the density fluctuations are controlled by the second derivative of the free energy with respect to the density.
At the critical point, this derivative is zero, leading to large fluctuations.
The effect of density fluctuations is that light of all wavelengths is scattered, making the fluid look milky white.
Einstein relates this to Rayleigh scattering, which is what happens when the fluctuation size is much smaller than the wavelength, and which explains why the sky is blue.
Einstein quantitatively derived critical opalescence from a treatment of density fluctuations, and demonstrated how both the effect and Rayleigh scattering originate from the atomistic constitution of matter.
The Annus Mirabilis papers are four articles pertaining to the photoelectric effect (which gave rise to quantum theory), Brownian motion, the special theory of relativity, and E = mc2 that Einstein published in the Annalen der Physik scientific journal in 1905.
These four works contributed substantially to the foundation of modern physics and changed views on space, time, and matter.
Einstein's "Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Körper" ("On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies") was received on 30 June 1905 and published 26 September of that same year.
It reconciled conflicts between Maxwell's equations (the laws of electricity and magnetism) and the laws of Newtonian mechanics by introducing changes to the laws of mechanics.
Observationally, the effects of these changes are most apparent at high speeds (where objects are moving at speeds close to the speed of light).
The theory developed in this paper later became known as Einstein's special theory of relativity.
This paper predicted that, when measured in the frame of a relatively moving observer, a clock carried by a moving body would appear to slow down, and the body itself would contract in its direction of motion.
This paper also argued that the idea of a luminiferous aether—one of the leading theoretical entities in physics at the time—was superfluous.
In his paper on mass–energy equivalence, Einstein produced E = mc2 as a consequence of his special relativity equations.
Einstein's 1905 work on relativity remained controversial for many years, but was accepted by leading physicists, starting with Max Planck.
Einstein originally framed special relativity in terms of kinematics (the study of moving bodies).
In 1908, Hermann Minkowski reinterpreted special relativity in geometric terms as a theory of spacetime.
Einstein adopted Minkowski's formalism in his 1915 general theory of relativity.
General relativity (GR) is a theory of gravitation that was developed by Einstein between 1907 and 1915.
According to it, the observed gravitational attraction between masses results from the warping of spacetime by those masses.
General relativity has developed into an essential tool in modern astrophysics; it provides the foundation for the current understanding of black holes, regions of space where gravitational attraction is so strong that not even light can escape.
As Einstein later said, the reason for the development of general relativity was that the preference of inertial motions within special relativity was unsatisfactory, while a theory which from the outset prefers no state of motion (even accelerated ones) should appear more satisfactory.
Consequently, in 1907 he published an article on acceleration under special relativity.
In that article titled "On the Relativity Principle and the Conclusions Drawn from It", he argued that free fall is really inertial motion, and that for a free-falling observer the rules of special relativity must apply.
This argument is called the equivalence principle.
In the same article, Einstein also predicted the phenomena of gravitational time dilation, gravitational redshift and gravitational lensing.
In 1911, Einstein published another article "On the Influence of Gravitation on the Propagation of Light" expanding on the 1907 article, in which he estimated the amount of deflection of light by massive bodies.
Thus, the theoretical prediction of general relativity could for the first time be tested experimentally.
In 1916, Einstein predicted gravitational waves, ripples in the curvature of spacetime which propagate as waves, traveling outward from the source, transporting energy as gravitational radiation.
The existence of gravitational waves is possible under general relativity due to its Lorentz invariance which brings the concept of a finite speed of propagation of the physical interactions of gravity with it.
By contrast, gravitational waves cannot exist in the Newtonian theory of gravitation, which postulates that the physical interactions of gravity propagate at infinite speed.
The first, indirect, detection of gravitational waves came in the 1970s through observation of a pair of closely orbiting neutron stars, PSR B1913+16.
The explanation for the decay in their orbital period was that they were emitting gravitational waves.
Einstein's prediction was confirmed on 11 February 2016, when researchers at LIGO published the first observation of gravitational waves, detected on Earth on 14 September 2015, nearly one hundred years after the prediction.
While developing general relativity, Einstein became confused about the gauge invariance in the theory.
He formulated an argument that led him to conclude that a general relativistic field theory is impossible.
He gave up looking for fully generally covariant tensor equations and searched for equations that would be invariant under general linear transformations only.
In June 1913, the Entwurf ('draft') theory was the result of these investigations.
As its name suggests, it was a sketch of a theory, less elegant and more difficult than general relativity, with the equations of motion supplemented by additional gauge fixing conditions.
After more than two years of intensive work, Einstein realized that the hole argument was mistaken and abandoned the theory in November 1915.
In 1917, Einstein applied the general theory of relativity to the structure of the universe as a whole.
He discovered that the general field equations predicted a universe that was dynamic, either contracting or expanding.
As observational evidence for a dynamic universe was lacking at the time, Einstein introduced a new term, the cosmological constant, into the field equations, in order to allow the theory to predict a static universe.
The modified field equations predicted a static universe of closed curvature, in accordance with Einstein's understanding of Mach's principle in these years.
This model became known as the Einstein World or Einstein's static universe.
This paper is widely regarded as marking the emergence of modern theoretical cosmology.
Following the discovery of the recession of the galaxies by Edwin Hubble in 1929, Einstein abandoned his static model of the universe, and proposed two dynamic models of the cosmos, the Friedmann–Einstein universe of 1931 and the Einstein–de Sitter universe of 1932.
In each of these models, Einstein discarded the cosmological constant, claiming that it was "in any case theoretically unsatisfactory".
In many Einstein biographies, it is claimed that Einstein referred to the cosmological constant in later years as his "biggest blunder", based on a letter George Gamow claimed to have received from him.
The astrophysicist Mario Livio has cast doubt on this claim.
In late 2013, a team led by the Irish physicist Cormac O'Raifeartaigh discovered evidence that, shortly after learning of Hubble's observations of the recession of the galaxies, Einstein considered a steady-state model of the universe.
In a hitherto overlooked manuscript, apparently written in early 1931, Einstein explored a model of the expanding universe in which the density of matter remains constant due to a continuous creation of matter, a process that he associated with the cosmological constant.
As he stated in the paper, "In what follows, I would like to draw attention to a solution to equation (1) that can account for Hubbel's [sic] facts, and in which the density is constant over time [.
For the density to remain constant, new particles of matter must be continually formed in the volume from space.
It thus appears that Einstein considered a steady-state model of the expanding universe many years before Hoyle, Bondi and Gold.
However, Einstein's steady-state model contained a fundamental flaw and he quickly abandoned the idea.
General relativity includes a dynamical spacetime, so it is difficult to see how to identify the conserved energy and momentum.
Noether's theorem allows these quantities to be determined from a Lagrangian with translation invariance, but general covariance makes translation invariance into something of a gauge symmetry.
The energy and momentum derived within general relativity by Noether's prescriptions do not make a real tensor for this reason.
Einstein argued that this is true for a fundamental reason: the gravitational field could be made to vanish by a choice of coordinates.
He maintained that the non-covariant energy momentum pseudotensor was, in fact, the best description of the energy momentum distribution in a gravitational field.
While the use of non-covariant objects like pseudotensors was criticized by Erwin Schrödinger and others, Einstein's approach has been echoed by physicists including Lev Landau and Evgeny Lifshitz.
In 1935, Einstein collaborated with Nathan Rosen to produce a model of a wormhole, often called Einstein–Rosen bridges.
His motivation was to model elementary particles with charge as a solution of gravitational field equations, in line with the program outlined in the paper "Do Gravitational Fields play an Important Role in the Constitution of the Elementary Particles?
These solutions cut and pasted Schwarzschild black holes to make a bridge between two patches.
Because these solutions included spacetime curvature without the presence of a physical body, Einstein and Rosen suggested that they could provide the beginnings of a theory that avoided the notion of point particles.
However, it was later found that Einstein–Rosen bridges are not stable.
In order to incorporate spinning point particles into general relativity, the affine connection needed to be generalized to include an antisymmetric part, called the torsion.
This modification was made by Einstein and Cartan in the 1920s.
In general relativity, gravitational force is reimagined as curvature of spacetime.
A curved path like an orbit is not the result of a force deflecting a body from an ideal straight-line path, but rather the body's attempt to fall freely through a background that is itself curved by the presence of other masses.
A remark by John Archibald Wheeler that has become proverbial among physicists summarizes the theory: "Spacetime tells matter how to move; matter tells spacetime how to curve.
The geodesic equation covers the former aspect, stating that freely falling bodies follow lines that are as straight as possible in a curved spacetime.
Einstein regarded this as an "independent fundamental assumption" that had to be postulated in addition to the field equations in order to complete the theory.
Believing this to be a shortcoming in how general relativity was originally presented, he wished to derive it from the field equations themselves.
Since the equations of general relativity are non-linear, a lump of energy made out of pure gravitational fields, like a black hole, would move on a trajectory which is determined by the Einstein field equations themselves, not by a new law.
Accordingly, Einstein proposed that the field equations would determine the path of a singular solution, like a black hole, to be a geodesic.
Both physicists and philosophers have often repeated the assertion that the geodesic equation can be obtained from applying the field equations to the motion of a gravitational singularity, but this claim remains disputed.
In a 1905 paper, Einstein postulated that light itself consists of localized particles (quanta).
Einstein's light quanta were nearly universally rejected by all physicists, including Max Planck and Niels Bohr.
This idea only became universally accepted in 1919, with Robert Millikan's detailed experiments on the photoelectric effect, and with the measurement of Compton scattering.
Einstein concluded that each wave of frequency f is associated with a collection of photons with energy hf each, where h is the Planck constant.
He did not say much more, because he was not sure how the particles were related to the wave.
But he did suggest that this idea would explain certain experimental results, notably the photoelectric effect.
Light quanta were dubbed photons by Gilbert N.
In 1907, Einstein proposed a model of matter where each atom in a lattice structure is an independent harmonic oscillator.
In the Einstein model, each atom oscillates independently—a series of equally spaced quantized states for each oscillator.
Einstein was aware that getting the frequency of the actual oscillations would be difficult, but he nevertheless proposed this theory because it was a particularly clear demonstration that quantum mechanics could solve the specific heat problem in classical mechanics.
Peter Debye refined this model.
In 1924, Einstein received a description of a statistical model from Indian physicist Satyendra Nath Bose, based on a counting method that assumed that light could be understood as a gas of indistinguishable particles.
Einstein noted that Bose's statistics applied to some atoms as well as to the proposed light particles, and submitted his translation of Bose's paper to the Zeitschrift für Physik.
Einstein also published his own articles describing the model and its implications, among them the Bose–Einstein condensate phenomenon that some particulates should appear at very low temperatures.
It was not until 1995 that the first such condensate was produced experimentally by Eric Allin Cornell and Carl Wieman using ultra-cooling equipment built at the NIST–JILA laboratory at the University of Colorado at Boulder.
Bose–Einstein statistics are now used to describe the behaviors of any assembly of bosons.
Einstein's sketches for this project may be seen in the Einstein Archive in the library of the Leiden University.
Although the patent office promoted Einstein to Technical Examiner Second Class in 1906, he had not given up on academia.
In 1908, he became a Privatdozent at the University of Bern.
In "Über die Entwicklung unserer Anschauungen über das Wesen und die Konstitution der Strahlung" ("The Development of our Views on the Composition and Essence of Radiation"), on the quantization of light, and in an earlier 1909 paper, Einstein showed that Max Planck's energy quanta must have well-defined momenta and act in some respects as independent, point-like particles.
This paper introduced the photon concept and inspired the notion of wave–particle duality in quantum mechanics.
Einstein saw this wave–particle duality in radiation as concrete evidence for his conviction that physics needed a new, unified foundation.
In a series of works completed from 1911 to 1913, Planck reformulated his 1900 quantum theory and introduced the idea of zero-point energy in his "second quantum theory".
Soon, this idea attracted the attention of Einstein and his assistant Otto Stern.
Assuming the energy of rotating diatomic molecules contains zero-point energy, they then compared the theoretical specific heat of hydrogen gas with the experimental data.
The numbers matched nicely.
However, after publishing the findings, they promptly withdrew their support, because they no longer had confidence in the correctness of the idea of zero-point energy.
In 1917, at the height of his work on relativity, Einstein published an article in Physikalische Zeitschrift that proposed the possibility of stimulated emission, the physical process that makes possible the maser and the laser.
This article showed that the statistics of absorption and emission of light would only be consistent with Planck's distribution law if the emission of light into a mode with n photons would be enhanced statistically compared to the emission of light into an empty mode.
This paper was enormously influential in the later development of quantum mechanics, because it was the first paper to show that the statistics of atomic transitions had simple laws.
Einstein discovered Louis de Broglie's work and supported his ideas, which were received skeptically at first.
In another major paper from this era, Einstein observed that de Broglie waves could explain the quantization rules of Bohr and Sommerfeld.
This paper would inspire Schrödinger's work of 1926.
Einstein played a major role in developing quantum theory, beginning with his 1905 paper on the photoelectric effect.
However, he became displeased with modern quantum mechanics as it had evolved after 1925, despite its acceptance by other physicists.
He was skeptical that the randomness of quantum mechanics was fundamental rather than the result of determinism, stating that God "is not playing at dice".
Until the end of his life, he continued to maintain that quantum mechanics was incomplete.
The Bohr–Einstein debates were a series of public disputes about quantum mechanics between Einstein and Niels Bohr, who were two of its founders.
Their debates are remembered because of their importance to the philosophy of science.
Their debates would influence later interpretations of quantum mechanics.
Einstein never fully accepted quantum mechanics.
While he recognized that it made correct predictions, he believed a more fundamental description of nature must be possible.
Over the years he presented multiple arguments to this effect, but the one he preferred most dated to a debate with Bohr in 1930.
Einstein suggested a thought experiment in which two objects are allowed to interact and then moved apart a great distance from each other.
The quantum-mechanical description of the two objects is a mathematical entity known as a wavefunction.
If the wavefunction that describes the two objects before their interaction is given, then the Schrödinger equation provides the wavefunction that describes them after their interaction.
But because of what would later be called quantum entanglement, measuring one object would lead to an instantaneous change of the wavefunction describing the other object, no matter how far away it is.
Moreover, the choice of which measurement to perform upon the first object would affect what wavefunction could result for the second object.
Einstein reasoned that no influence could propagate from the first object to the second instantaneously fast.
Indeed, he argued, physics depends on being able to tell one thing apart from another, and such instantaneous influences would call that into question.
Because the true "physical condition" of the second object could not be immediately altered by an action done to the first, Einstein concluded, the wavefunction could not be that true physical condition, only an incomplete description of it.
A more famous version of this argument came in 1935, when Einstein published a paper with Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen that laid out what would become known as the EPR paradox.
In this thought experiment, two particles interact in such a way that the wavefunction describing them is entangled.
Then, no matter how far the two particles were separated, a precise position measurement on one particle would imply the ability to predict, perfectly, the result of measuring the position of the other particle.
Likewise, a precise momentum measurement of one particle would result in an equally precise prediction for of the momentum of the other particle, without needing to disturb the other particle in any way.
They argued that no action taken on the first particle could instantaneously affect the other, since this would involve information being transmitted faster than light, which is forbidden by the theory of relativity.
They invoked a principle, later known as the "EPR criterion of reality", positing that: "If, without in any way disturbing a system, we can predict with certainty (i.
But quantum mechanics considers these two observables incompatible and thus does not associate simultaneous values for both to any system.
Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen therefore concluded that quantum theory does not provide a complete description of reality.
In 1964, John Stewart Bell carried the analysis of quantum entanglement much further.
He deduced that if measurements are performed independently on the two separated particles of an entangled pair, then the assumption that the outcomes depend upon hidden variables within each half implies a mathematical constraint on how the outcomes on the two measurements are correlated.
This constraint would later be called a Bell inequality.
Bell then showed that quantum physics predicts correlations that violate this inequality.
Consequently, the only way that hidden variables could explain the predictions of quantum physics is if they are "nonlocal", which is to say that somehow the two particles are able to interact instantaneously no matter how widely they ever become separated.
Bell argued that because an explanation of quantum phenomena in terms of hidden variables would require nonlocality, the EPR paradox "is resolved in the way which Einstein would have liked least".
Despite this, and although Einstein personally found the argument in the EPR paper overly complicated, that paper became among the most influential papers published in Physical Review.
It is considered a centerpiece of the development of quantum information theory.
Encouraged by his success with general relativity, Einstein sought an even more ambitious geometrical theory that would treat gravitation and electromagnetism as aspects of a single entity.
In 1950, he described his unified field theory in a Scientific American article titled "On the Generalized Theory of Gravitation".
His attempt to find the most fundamental laws of nature won him praise but not success: a particularly conspicuous blemish of his model was that it did not accommodate the strong and weak nuclear forces, neither of which was well understood until many years after his death.
Although most researchers now believe that Einstein's approach to unifying physics was mistaken, his goal of a theory of everything is one to which his successors still aspire.
Einstein conducted other investigations that were unsuccessful and abandoned.
These pertain to force, superconductivity, and other research.
In addition to longtime collaborators Leopold Infeld, Nathan Rosen, Peter Bergmann and others, Einstein also had some one-shot collaborations with various scientists.
In 1908, Owen Willans Richardson predicted that a change in the magnetic moment of a free body will cause this body to rotate.
This effect is a consequence of the conservation of angular momentum and is strong enough to be observable in ferromagnetic materials.
Einstein and Wander Johannes de Haas published two papers in 1915 claiming the first experimental observation of the effect.
Measurements of this kind demonstrate that the phenomenon of magnetization is caused by the alignment (polarization) of the angular momenta of the electrons in the material along the axis of magnetization.
These measurements also allow the separation of the two contributions to the magnetization: that which is associated with the spin and with the orbital motion of the electrons.
The Einstein-de Haas experiment is the only experiment conceived, realized and published by Albert Einstein himself.
A complete original version of the Einstein-de Haas experimental equipment was donated by Geertruida de Haas-Lorentz, wife of de Haas and daughter of Lorentz, to the Ampère Museum in Lyon France in 1961 where it is currently on display.
It was lost among the museum's holdings and was rediscovered in 2023.
In 1926, Einstein and his former student Leó Szilárd co-invented (and in 1930, patented) the Einstein refrigerator.
This absorption refrigerator was then revolutionary for having no moving parts and using only heat as an input.
On 11 November 1930, U.
Their invention was not immediately put into commercial production, but the most promising of their patents were acquired by the Swedish company Electrolux.
Einstein also invented an electromagnetic pump, sound reproduction device, and several other household devices.
While traveling, Einstein wrote daily to his wife Elsa and adopted stepdaughters Margot and Ilse.
The letters were included in the papers bequeathed to the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
Margot Einstein permitted the personal letters to be made available to the public, but requested that it not be done until twenty years after her death (she died in 1986).
Barbara Wolff, of the Hebrew University's Albert Einstein Archives, told the BBC that there are about 3,500 pages of private correspondence written between 1912 and 1955.
In his final four years, Einstein was involved with the establishment of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York City.
In 1979, the Albert Einstein Memorial was unveiled outside the National Academy of Sciences building in Washington, D.
It was sculpted by Robert Berks.
Einstein can be seen holding a paper with three of his most important equations: for the photoelectric effect, general relativity and mass-energy equivalence.
Einstein's right of publicity was litigated in 2015 in a federal district court in California.
Although the court initially held that the right had expired, that ruling was immediately appealed, and the decision was later vacated in its entirety.
The underlying claims between the parties in that lawsuit were ultimately settled.
The right is enforceable, and the Hebrew University of Jerusalem is the exclusive representative of that right.
Corbis, successor to The Roger Richman Agency, licenses the use of his name and associated imagery, as agent for the university.
Mount Einstein in the Chugach Mountains of Alaska was named in 1955.
Mount Einstein in New Zealand's Paparoa Range was named after him in 1970 by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
In 1999, Einstein was named Time's Person of the Century.
In 1999, a survey of the top 100 physicists voted for Einstein as the "greatest physicist ever", while a parallel survey of rank-and-file physicists gave the top spot to Isaac Newton, with Einstein second.
The physicist Lev Landau ranked physicists from 0 to 5 on a logarithmic scale of productivity and genius, with Newton receiving the highest ranking of 0, followed by Einstein with 0.
Science writer John G.
Simmons ranked Einstein second after Newton in The Scientific 100, based on a qualitative assessment in which he ordered the scientists according to overall influence, and noted that the work of Einstein "forms the source of twentieth-century physics".
Physicist Eugene Wigner noted that while John von Neumann had the quickest and most acute mind he ever knew, it was Einstein who had the more penetrating and original mind of the two, stating that:But Einstein's understanding was deeper than even Jancsi von Neumann's.
His mind was both more penetrating and more original than von Neumann's.
And that is a very remarkable statement.
Einstein took an extraordinary pleasure in invention.
Two of his greatest inventions are the Special and General Theories of Relativity; and for all of Jancsi's brilliance, he never produced anything so original.
No modern physicist has.
The International Union of Pure and Applied Physics declared 2005 the "World Year of Physics", also known as "Einstein Year", in recognition of Einstein's "miracle year" in 1905.
It was also declared the "International Year of Physics" by the United Nations.
Einstein became one of the most famous scientific celebrities after the confirmation of his general theory of relativity in 1919.
Although most of the public had little understanding of his work, he was widely recognized and admired.
In the period before World War II, The New Yorker published a vignette in their "The Talk of the Town" feature saying that Einstein was so well known in America that he would be stopped on the street by people wanting him to explain "that theory".
Eventually he came to cope with unwanted enquirers by pretending to be someone else: "Pardon me, sorry!
Always I am mistaken for Professor Einstein.
Einstein has been the subject of or inspiration for many novels, films, plays, and works of music.
He is a favorite model for depictions of absent-minded professors; his expressive face and distinctive hairstyle have been widely copied and exaggerated.
Time magazine's Frederic Golden wrote that Einstein was "a cartoonist's dream come true".
His intellectual achievements and originality made Einstein broadly synonymous with genius.
Many popular quotations are often misattributed to him.
Einstein received numerous awards and honors, and in 1922, he was awarded the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics "for his services to Theoretical Physics, and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect".
The Nobel committee decided that none of the nominations in 1921 met the criteria set by Alfred Nobel, so the 1921 prize was carried forward and awarded to Einstein in 1922.
Einsteinium, a synthetic chemical element, was named in his honor in 1955, a few months after his death.
Einstein, Albert; et al.
Archived from the original on 17 December 2007.
Retrieved 25 May 2006.
Einstein, Albert (May 1949).
Sweezy, Paul; Huberman, Leo (eds.
New York: Monthly Review Foundation.
Archived from the original on 11 January 2006.
Retrieved 16 January 2006 – via MonthlyReview.
Einstein, Albert (September 1960).
Foreword to Gandhi Wields the Weapon of Moral Power: Three Case Histories.
Introduction by Bharatan Kumarappa.
Ahmedabad: Navajivan Publishing House.
Foreword originally written in April 1953.
Albert Einstein on Nobelprize.
An aquifer is an underground layer of water-bearing material consisting of permeable or fractured rock, or of unconsolidated materials (gravel, sand, or silt).
Aquifers vary greatly in their characteristics.
The study of water flow in aquifers and the characterization of aquifers is called hydrogeology.
Related concepts include aquitard, a bed of low permeability along an aquifer, and aquiclude (or aquifuge), a solid and impermeable region underlying or overlying an aquifer, the pressure of which could lead to the formation of a confined aquifer.
Aquifers can be classified as saturated versus unsaturated, aquifers versus aquitards, confined versus unconfined, isotropic versus anisotropic, and porous, karst, fractured, or transboundary.
Groundwater from aquifers can be sustainably harvested by humans through the use of wells.
This groundwater is mainly used for agricultral purposes but is used for other reasons such as home use, industrial use and is sometimes used as a source of renewable energy.
Groundwater is a major source of fresh water for many regions, although it can present various challenges for the environment, such as overdrafting (extracting groundwater beyond the equilibrium yield of the aquifer), groundwater-related subsidence of land, and the salinization or pollution of the groundwater.
The word aquifer is derived from the latin prefix aqui-, the combining form of aqua meaning "water," and suffix -fer, meaning "bearing.
Aquifers occur from near-surface to deeper than 9,000 metres (30,000 ft).
Those closer to the surface are not only more likely to be used for water supply and irrigation, but are also more likely to be replenished by local rainfall.
Although aquifers are sometimes characterized as "underground rivers or lakes," they are actually porous rock saturated with water.
Many desert areas have limestone hills or mountains within them or close to them that can be exploited as groundwater resources.
Part of the Atlas Mountains in North Africa, the Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon ranges between Syria and Lebanon, the Jebel Akhdar in Oman, parts of the Sierra Nevada and neighboring ranges in the United States' Southwest, have shallow aquifers that are exploited for their water.
Overexploitation can lead to the exceeding of the practical sustained yield; i.
Along the coastlines of certain countries, such as Libya and Israel, increased water usage associated with population growth has caused a lowering of the water table and the subsequent contamination of the groundwater with saltwater from the sea.
In 2013 large aquifers containing offshore freshened groundwater were discovered under continental shelves of Australia, China, North America and South Africa.
They contain an estimated half a million cubic kilometers of "low salinity" water that could be economically processed into potable water.
The reserves formed when ocean levels were lower and rainwater made its way into the ground in land areas that were not submerged until the ice age ended 20,000 years ago.
The volume is estimated to be 100 times the amount of water extracted from other aquifers since 1900.
An aquitard is a zone within the Earth that restricts the flow of groundwater from one aquifer to another.
An aquitard can sometimes, if completely impermeable, be called an aquiclude or aquifuge.
Aquitards are composed of layers of either clay or non-porous rock with low hydraulic conductivity.
Groundwater can be found at nearly every point in the Earth's shallow subsurface to some degree, although aquifers do not necessarily contain fresh water.
The Earth's crust can be divided into two regions: the saturated zone or phreatic zone (e.
Saturated means the pressure head of the water is greater than atmospheric pressure (it has a gauge pressure > 0).
The definition of the water table is the surface where the pressure head is equal to atmospheric pressure (where gauge pressure = 0).
Unsaturated conditions occur above the water table where the pressure head is negative (absolute pressure can never be negative, but gauge pressure can) and the water that incompletely fills the pores of the aquifer material is under suction.
The water content in the unsaturated zone is held in place by surface adhesive forces and it rises above the water table (the zero-gauge-pressure isobar) by capillary action to saturate a small zone above the phreatic surface (the capillary fringe) at less than atmospheric pressure.
This is termed tension saturation and is not the same as saturation on a water-content basis.
Water content in a capillary fringe decreases with increasing distance from the phreatic surface.
The capillary head depends on soil pore size.
In sandy soils with larger pores, the head will be less than in clay soils with very small pores.
The normal capillary rise in a clayey soil is less than 1.
The capillary rise of water in a small-diameter tube involves the same physical process.
The water table is the level to which water will rise in a large-diameter pipe (e.
Aquifers are typically saturated regions of the subsurface that produce an economically feasible quantity of water to a well or spring (e.
An aquitard is a zone within the Earth that restricts the flow of groundwater from one aquifer to another.
A completely impermeable aquitard is called an aquiclude or aquifuge.
Aquitards contain layers of either clay or non-porous rock with low hydraulic conductivity.
In mountainous areas especially near rivers, the main aquifers are typically unconsolidated alluvium, that is horizontal layers of materials deposited by water processes such as rivers and streams.
In cross-section, they appear as layers of alternating coarse and fine materials.
Coarse materials, because of the high energy needed to move them, tend to be found nearer to their source, such as mountain fronts or rivers, whereas the fine-grained material travels farther, to the flatter parts of the basin or overbank areas—sometimes called the pressure area.
Since there are less fine-grained deposits near the source, those aquifers, also known as the fore-bay area, are often unconfined or in hydraulic communication with the land surface.
An unconfined aquifer has no impermeable barrier immediately above it, such that the water level can rise in response to recharge.
A confined aquifer has an overlying impermeable barrier that prevents the water level in the aquifer from rising any higher.
An aquifer in the same geologic unit may be confined in one area and unconfined in another.
Unconfined aquifers are sometimes also called water table or phreatic aquifers, because their upper boundary is the water table or phreatic surface (see Biscayne Aquifer).
Typically (but not always) the shallowest aquifer at a given location is unconfined, meaning it does not have a confining layer (an aquitard or aquiclude) between it and the surface.
The term "perched" refers to ground water accumulating above a low-permeability unit or strata, such as a clay layer.
This term is generally used to refer to a small local area of ground water that occurs at an elevation higher than a regionally extensive aquifer.
The difference between perched and unconfined aquifers is their size (perched is smaller).
Confined aquifers are aquifers that are overlain by a confining layer, often made up of clay.
The confining layer might offer some protection from surface contamination.
If the distinction between confined and unconfined is not clear geologically (i.
Confined aquifers have very low storativity values (much less than 0.
Unconfined aquifers have storativities (typically called specific yield) greater than 0.
In isotropic aquifers or aquifer layers the hydraulic conductivity (K) is equal for flow in all directions, while in anisotropic conditions it differs, notably in horizontal (Kh) and vertical (Kv) sense.
Semi-confined aquifers with one or more aquitards work as an anisotropic system, even when the separate layers are isotropic, because the compound Kh and Kv values are different (see hydraulic transmissivity and hydraulic resistance).
When calculating flow to drains or flow to wells in an aquifer, the anisotropy is to be taken into account lest the resulting design of the drainage system may be faulty.
To properly manage an aquifer its properties must be understood.
Many properties must be known to predict how an aquifer will respond to rainfall, drought, pumping, and contamination.
Considerations include where and how much water enters the groundwater from rainfall and snowmelt, how fast and in what direction the groundwater travels, and how much water leaves the ground as springs.
Computer models can be used to test how accurately the understanding of the aquifer properties matches the actual aquifer performance.
Environmental regulations require sites with potential sources of contamination to demonstrate that the hydrology has been characterized.
Porous aquifers typically occur in sand and sandstone.
Their properties depend on the depositional sedimentary environment and later natural cementation of the sand grains.
The environment where a sand body was deposited controls the orientation of the sand grains, the horizontal and vertical variations, and the distribution of shale layers.
Even thin shale layers are important barriers to groundwater flow.
All these factors affect the porosity and permeability of sandy aquifers.
Sandy deposits formed in shallow marine environments and in windblown sand dune environments have moderate to high permeability while sandy deposits formed in river environments have low to moderate permeability.
Rainfall and snowmelt enter the groundwater where the aquifer is near the surface.
Groundwater flow directions can be determined from potentiometric surface maps of water levels in wells and springs.
Aquifer tests and well tests can be used with Darcy's law flow equations to determine the ability of a porous aquifer to convey water.
Analyzing this type of information over an area gives an indication how much water can be pumped without overdrafting and how contamination will travel.
In porous aquifers groundwater flows as slow seepage in pores between sand grains.
A groundwater flow rate of 1 foot per day (0.
Porosity is important, but, alone, it does not determine a rock's ability to act as an aquifer.
Areas of the Deccan Traps, a basaltic lava formation in west-central India, are examples of rock formations with high porosity but low permeability, making them poor aquifers.
Similarly, the micro-porous (Upper Cretaceous) Chalk Group of south east England, although having a reasonably high porosity, has a low grain-to-grain permeability, with its good water-yielding characteristics mostly due to micro-fracturing and fissuring.
Karst aquifers typically develop in limestone.
Surface water containing natural carbonic acid moves down into small fissures in limestone.
This carbonic acid gradually dissolves limestone thereby enlarging the fissures.
The enlarged fissures allow a larger quantity of water to enter which leads to a progressive enlargement of openings.
Abundant small openings store a large quantity of water.
The larger openings form a conduit system that drains the aquifer to springs.
Characterization of karst aquifers requires field exploration to locate sinkholes, swallets, sinking streams, and springs in addition to studying geological maps.
Conventional hydrogeologic methods such as aquifer tests and potentiometric mapping are insufficient to characterize the complexity of karst aquifers.
These conventional investigation methods need to be supplemented with dye traces, measurement of spring discharges, and analysis of water chemistry.
Geological Survey dye tracing has determined that conventional groundwater models that assume a uniform distribution of porosity are not applicable for karst aquifers.
Linear alignment of surface features such as straight stream segments and sinkholes develop along fracture traces.
Locating a well in a fracture trace or intersection of fracture traces increases the likelihood to encounter good water production.
Voids in karst aquifers can be large enough to cause destructive collapse or subsidence of the ground surface that can initiate a catastrophic release of contaminants.
Groundwater flow rate in karst aquifers is much more rapid than in porous aquifers as shown in the accompanying image to the left.
For example, in the Barton Springs Edwards aquifer, dye traces measured the karst groundwater flow rates from 0.
The rapid groundwater flow rates make karst aquifers much more sensitive to groundwater contamination than porous aquifers.
In the extreme case, groundwater may exist in underground rivers (e.
If a rock unit of low porosity is highly fractured, it can also make a good aquifer (via fissure flow), provided the rock has a hydraulic conductivity sufficient to facilitate movement of water.
Remote sensing in 2015 and direct sampling in 2025 discovered an undersea reservoir of fresh water off the coast of Nantucket, stretching possibly from New Jersey to Maine and thus representing one of the largest freshwater aquifers in the United States.
The aquifer itself may represent glacial meltwater once overlain by dry land that subsequently was flooded by rising sea levels—as caused by the Holocene glacial retreat.
Or it, (the aquifer) may maintain long-term groundwater flow connections along the US east coast, and thereby is recharged even today by contemporary rainfall over coastal surface lands.
Challenges for using groundwater include: overdrafting (extracting groundwater beyond the equilibrium yield of the aquifer), groundwater-related subsidence of land, groundwater becoming saline, and groundwater pollution.
Aquifer depletion is a problem in some areas, especially in northern Africa, where one example is the Great Manmade River project of Libya.
However, new methods of groundwater management such as artificial recharge and injection of surface waters during seasonal wet periods has extended the life of many freshwater aquifers, especially in the United States.
The Great Artesian Basin situated in Australia is arguably the largest groundwater aquifer in the world (over 1.
It plays a large part in water supplies for Queensland, some remote parts of South Australia and most of the Northern Territory.
Discontinuous sand bodies at the base of the McMurray Formation in the Athabasca Oil Sands region of northeastern Alberta, Canada, are commonly referred to as the Basal Water Sand (BWS) aquifers.
Saturated with water, they are confined beneath impermeable bitumen-saturated sands that are exploited to recover bitumen for synthetic crude oil production.
Where they are deep-lying and recharge occurs from underlying Devonian formations they are saline, and where they are shallow and recharged by surface water they are non-saline.
The BWS typically pose problems for the recovery of bitumen, whether by open-pit mining or by in situ methods such as steam-assisted gravity drainage (SAGD), and in some areas they are targets for waste-water injection.
The Guarani Aquifer, located beneath the surface of Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay, is one of the world's largest aquifer systems and is an important source of fresh water.
Named after the Guarani people, it covers 1,200,000 km2 (460,000 sq mi), with a volume of about 40,000 km3 (9,600 cu mi), a thickness of between 50 and 800 m (160 and 2,620 ft) and a maximum depth of about 1,800 m (5,900 ft).
The Ogallala Aquifer of the central United States is one of the world's great aquifers, but in places it is being rapidly depleted by growing municipal use, and continuing agricultural use.
This huge aquifer, which underlies portions of eight states, contains primarily fossil water from the time of the last glaciation.
Annual recharge, in the more arid parts of the aquifer, is estimated to total only about 10 percent of annual withdrawals.
According to a 2013 report by the United States Geological Survey (USGS), the depletion between 2001 and 2008, inclusive, is about 32 percent of the cumulative depletion during the entire 20th century.
In the United States, the biggest users of water from aquifers include agricultural irrigation and oil and coal extraction.
In addition to widely recognized environmental consequences, groundwater depletion also adversely impacts the long-term sustainability of groundwater supplies to help meet the Nation’s water needs.
An example of a significant and sustainable carbonate aquifer is the Edwards Aquifer in central Texas.
This carbonate aquifer has historically been providing high quality water for nearly 2 million people, and even today, is full because of tremendous recharge from a number of area streams, rivers and lakes.
The primary risk to this resource is human development over the recharge areas.
Hydrology (from Ancient Greek ὕδωρ (húdōr) 'water' and -λογία (-logía) 'study of') is the scientific study of the movement, distribution, and management of water on Earth and other planets, including the water cycle, water resources, and drainage basin sustainability.
A practitioner of hydrology is called a hydrologist.
Hydrologists are scientists studying earth or environmental science, civil or environmental engineering, and physical geography.
Using various analytical methods and scientific techniques, they collect and analyze data to help solve water related problems such as environmental preservation, natural disasters, and water management.
Hydrology subdivides into surface water hydrology, groundwater hydrology (hydrogeology), and marine hydrology.
Domains of hydrology include hydrometeorology, surface hydrology, hydrogeology, drainage-basin management, and water quality.
Oceanography and meteorology are not included because water is only one of many important aspects within those fields.
Hydrological research can inform environmental engineering, policy, and planning.
Chemical hydrology is the study of the chemical characteristics of water.
Ecohydrology is the study of interactions between organisms and the hydrologic cycle.
Hydrogeology is the study of the presence and movement of groundwater.
Hydrogeochemistry is the study of how terrestrial water dissolves minerals weathering and this effect on water chemistry.
Hydroinformatics is the adaptation of information technology to hydrology and water resources applications.
Hydrometeorology is the study of the transfer of water and energy between land and water body surfaces and the lower atmosphere.
Isotope hydrology is the study of the isotopic signatures of water.
Surface hydrology is the study of hydrologic processes that operate at or near Earth's surface.
Drainage basin management covers water storage, in the form of reservoirs, and floods protection.
Water quality includes the chemistry of water in rivers and lakes, both of pollutants and natural solutes.
Calculation of rainfall.
Calculating surface runoff and precipitation.
Determining the water balance of a region.
Determining the agricultural water balance.
Designing riparian-zone restoration projects.
Mitigating and predicting flood, landslide and Drought risk.
Designing irrigation schemes and managing agricultural productivity.
Part of the hazard module in catastrophe modeling.
Providing drinking water.
Designing dams for water supply or hydroelectric power generation.
Designing sewers and urban drainage systems.
Analyzing the impacts of antecedent moisture on sanitary sewer systems.
Predicting geomorphologic changes, such as erosion or sedimentation.
Assessing the impacts of natural and anthropogenic environmental change on water resources.
Assessing contaminant transport risk and establishing environmental policy guidelines.
Estimating the water resource potential of river basins.
Water resources management.
Water resources engineering - application of hydrological and hydraulic principles to the planning, development, and management of water resources for beneficial human use.
It involves assessing water availability, quality, and demand; designing and operating water infrastructure; and implementing strategies for sustainable water management.
Hydrology has been subject to investigation and engineering for millennia.
Ancient Egyptians were one of the first to employ hydrology in their engineering and agriculture, inventing a form of water management known as basin irrigation.
Mesopotamian towns were protected from flooding with high earthen walls.
Aqueducts were built by the Greeks and Romans, while history shows that the Chinese built irrigation and flood control works.
The ancient Sinhalese used hydrology to build complex irrigation works in Sri Lanka, also known for the invention of the valve pit (bisokotuwas) which allowed construction of large reservoirs, anicuts and canals which still function.
Marcus Vitruvius, in the first century BC, described a philosophical theory of the hydrologic cycle, in which precipitation falling in the mountains infiltrated the Earth's surface and led to streams and springs in the lowlands.
With the adoption of a more scientific approach, Leonardo da Vinci and Bernard Palissy independently reached an accurate representation of the hydrologic cycle.
It was not until the 17th century that hydrologic variables began to be quantified.
Pioneers of the modern science of hydrology include Pierre Perrault, Edme Mariotte and Edmund Halley.
By measuring rainfall, runoff, and drainage area, Perrault showed that rainfall was sufficient to account for the flow of the Seine.
Mariotte combined velocity and river cross-section measurements to obtain a discharge value, again in the Seine.
Halley showed that the evaporation from the Mediterranean Sea was sufficient to account for the outflow of rivers flowing into the sea.
Advances in the 18th century included the Bernoulli piezometer and Bernoulli's equation, by Daniel Bernoulli, and the Pitot tube, by Henri Pitot.
The 19th century saw development in groundwater hydrology, including Darcy's law, the Dupuit-Thiem well formula, and Hagen-Poiseuille's capillary flow equation.
Rational analyses began to replace empiricism in the 20th century, while governmental agencies began their own hydrological research programs.
Of particular importance were Leroy Sherman's unit hydrograph, the infiltration theory of Robert E.
Theis' aquifer test/equation describing well hydraulics.
Since the 1950s, hydrology has been approached with a more theoretical basis than in the past, facilitated by advances in the physical understanding of hydrological processes and by the advent of computers and especially geographic information systems (GIS).
The central theme of hydrology is that water circulates throughout the Earth through different pathways and at different rates.
The most vivid image of this is in the evaporation of water from the ocean, which forms clouds.
These clouds drift over the land and produce rain.
The rainwater flows into lakes, rivers, or aquifers.
The water in lakes, rivers, and aquifers then either evaporates back to the atmosphere or eventually flows back to the ocean, completing a cycle.
Water changes its state of being several times throughout this cycle.
The areas of research within hydrology concern the movement of water between its various states, or within a given state, or simply quantifying the amounts in these states in a given region.
Parts of hydrology concern developing methods for directly measuring these flows or amounts of water, while others concern modeling these processes either for scientific knowledge or for making a prediction in practical applications.
Ground water is water beneath Earth's surface, often pumped for drinking water.
Groundwater hydrology (hydrogeology) considers quantifying groundwater flow and solute transport.
Problems in describing the saturated zone include the characterization of aquifers in terms of flow direction, groundwater pressure and, by inference, groundwater depth (see: aquifer test).
Measurements here can be made using a piezometer.
Aquifers are also described in terms of hydraulic conductivity, storativity and transmissivity.
There are a number of geophysical methods for characterizing aquifers.
There are also problems in characterizing the vadose zone (unsaturated zone).
Infiltration is the process by which water enters the soil.
Some of the water is absorbed, and the rest percolates down to the water table.
The infiltration capacity, the maximum rate at which the soil can absorb water, depends on several factors.
The layer that is already saturated provides a resistance that is proportional to its thickness, while that plus the depth of water above the soil provides the driving force (hydraulic head).
Dry soil can allow rapid infiltration by capillary action; this force diminishes as the soil becomes wet.
Compaction reduces the porosity and the pore sizes.
Surface cover increases capacity by retarding runoff, reducing compaction and other processes.
Higher temperatures reduce viscosity, increasing infiltration.
Soil moisture can be measured in various ways; by capacitance probe, time domain reflectometer or tensiometer.
Other methods include solute sampling and geophysical methods.
Hydrology considers quantifying surface water flow and solute transport, although the treatment of flows in large rivers is sometimes considered as a distinct topic of hydraulics or hydrodynamics.
Surface water flow can include flow both in recognizable river channels and otherwise.
Methods for measuring flow once the water has reached a river include the stream gauge (see: discharge), and tracer techniques.
Other topics include chemical transport as part of surface water, sediment transport and erosion.
One of the important areas of hydrology is the interchange between rivers and aquifers.
Groundwater/surface water interactions in streams and aquifers can be complex and the direction of net water flux (into surface water or into the aquifer) may vary spatially along a stream channel and over time at any particular location, depending on the relationship between stream stage and groundwater levels.
In some considerations, hydrology is thought of as starting at the land-atmosphere boundary and so it is important to have adequate knowledge of both precipitation and evaporation.
Precipitation can be measured in various ways: disdrometer for precipitation characteristics at a fine time scale; radar for cloud properties, rain rate estimation, hail and snow detection; rain gauge for routine accurate measurements of rain and snowfall; satellite for rainy area identification, rain rate estimation, land-cover/land-use, and soil moisture, snow cover or snow water equivalent for example.
Evaporation is an important part of the water cycle.
It is partly affected by humidity, which can be measured by a sling psychrometer.
It is also affected by the presence of snow, hail, and ice and can relate to dew, mist and fog.
Direct measurement of evaporation can be obtained using Simon's evaporation pan.
Detailed studies of evaporation involve boundary layer considerations as well as momentum, heat flux, and energy budgets.
Remote sensing of hydrologic processes can provide information on locations where in situ sensors may be unavailable or sparse.
It also enables observations over large spatial extents.
Many of the variables constituting the terrestrial water balance, for example surface water storage, soil moisture, precipitation, evapotranspiration, and snow and ice, are measurable using remote sensing at various spatial-temporal resolutions and accuracies.
Sources of remote sensing include land-based sensors, airborne sensors and satellite sensors which can capture microwave, thermal and near-infrared data or use lidar, for example.
In hydrology, studies of water quality concern organic and inorganic compounds, and both dissolved and sediment material.
In addition, water quality is affected by the interaction of dissolved oxygen with organic material and various chemical transformations that may take place.
Measurements of water quality may involve either in-situ methods, in which analyses take place on-site, often automatically, and laboratory-based analyses and may include microbiological analysis.
Observations of hydrologic processes are used to make predictions of the future behavior of hydrologic systems (water flow, water quality).
One of the major current concerns in hydrologic research is "Prediction in Ungauged Basins" (PUB), i.
The aims of Statistical hydrology is to provide appropriate statistical methods for analyzing and modeling various parts of the hydrological cycle.
By analyzing the statistical properties of hydrologic records, such as rainfall or river flow, hydrologists can estimate future hydrologic phenomena.
When making assessments of how often relatively rare events will occur, analyses are made in terms of the return period of such events.
Other quantities of interest include the average flow in a river, in a year or by season.
These estimates are important for engineers and economists so that proper risk analysis can be performed to influence investment decisions in future infrastructure and to determine the yield reliability characteristics of water supply systems.
Statistical information is utilized to formulate operating rules for large dams forming part of systems which include agricultural, industrial and residential demands.
Hydrological models are simplified, conceptual representations of a part of the hydrologic cycle.
They are primarily used for hydrological prediction and for understanding hydrological processes, within the general field of scientific modeling.
Models based on data.
These models are black box systems, using mathematical and statistical concepts to link a certain input (for instance rainfall) to the model output (for instance runoff).
Commonly used techniques are regression, transfer functions, and system identification.
The simplest of these models may be linear models, but it is common to deploy non-linear components to represent some general aspects of a catchment's response without going deeply into the real physical processes involved.
An example of such an aspect is the well-known behavior that a catchment will respond much more quickly and strongly when it is already wet than when it is dry.
Models based on process descriptions.
These models try to represent the physical processes observed in the real world.
Typically, such models contain representations of surface runoff, subsurface flow, evapotranspiration, and channel flow, but they can be far more complicated.
Within this category, models can be divided into conceptual and deterministic.
Conceptual models link simplified representations of the hydrological processes in an area, whereas deterministic models seek to resolve as much of the physics of a system as possible.
These models can be subdivided into single-event models and continuous simulation models.
Recent research in hydrological modeling tries to have a more global approach to the understanding of the behavior of hydrologic systems to make better predictions and to face the major challenges in water resources management.
Water movement is a significant means by which other materials, such as soil, gravel, boulders or pollutants, are transported from place to place.
Initial input to receiving waters may arise from a point source discharge or a line source or area source, such as surface runoff.
Since the 1960s rather complex mathematical models have been developed, facilitated by the availability of high-speed computers.
The most common pollutant classes analyzed are nutrients, pesticides, total dissolved solids and sediment.
Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Science, Inc.
Oceanography is the more general study of water in the oceans and estuaries.
Meteorology is the more general study of the atmosphere and of weather, including precipitation as snow and rainfall.
Limnology is the study of lakes, rivers and wetlands ecosystems.
It covers the biological, chemical, physical, geological, and other attributes of all inland waters (running and standing waters, both fresh and saline, natural or man-made).
Water resources are sources of water that are useful or potentially useful.
Hydrology studies the availability of those resources, but usually not their uses.
Groundwater is the water present beneath Earth's surface in rock and soil pore spaces and in the fractures of rock formations.
About 30 percent of all readily available fresh water in the world is groundwater.
A unit of rock or an unconsolidated deposit is called an aquifer when it can yield a usable quantity of water.
The depth at which soil pore spaces or fractures and voids in rock become completely saturated with water is called the water table.
Groundwater is recharged from the surface; it may discharge from the surface naturally at springs and seeps, and can form oases or wetlands.
Groundwater is also often withdrawn for agricultural, municipal, and industrial use by constructing and operating extraction wells.
The study of the distribution and movement of groundwater is hydrogeology, also called groundwater hydrology.
Typically, groundwater is thought of as water flowing through shallow aquifers, but, in the technical sense, it can also contain soil moisture, permafrost (frozen soil), immobile water in very low permeability bedrock, and deep geothermal or oil formation water.
Groundwater is hypothesized to provide lubrication that can possibly influence the movement of faults.
It is likely that much of Earth's subsurface contains some water, which may be mixed with other fluids in some instances.
Groundwater is often cheaper, more convenient and less vulnerable to pollution than surface water.
Therefore, it is commonly used for public drinking water supplies.
For example, groundwater provides the largest source of usable water storage in the United States, and California annually withdraws the largest amount of groundwater of all the states.
Underground reservoirs contain far more water than the capacity of all surface reservoirs and lakes in the US, including the Great Lakes.
Many municipal water supplies are derived solely from groundwater.
Over 2 billion people rely on it as their primary water source worldwide.
Human use of groundwater causes environmental problems.
For example, polluted groundwater is less visible and more difficult to clean up than pollution in rivers and lakes.
Groundwater pollution most often results from improper disposal of wastes on land.
Major sources include industrial and household chemicals and garbage landfills, excessive fertilizers and pesticides used in agriculture, industrial waste lagoons, tailings and process wastewater from mines, industrial fracking, oil field brine pits, leaking underground oil storage tanks and pipelines, sewage sludge and septic systems.
Additionally, groundwater is susceptible to saltwater intrusion in coastal areas and can cause land subsidence when extracted unsustainably, leading to sinking cities (like Bangkok) and loss in elevation (such as the multiple meters lost in the Central Valley of California).
These issues are made more complicated by sea level rise and other effects of climate change, particularly those on the water cycle.
Earth's axial tilt has shifted 31 inches because of human groundwater pumping.
Groundwater is fresh water located in the subsurface pore space of soil and rocks.
It is also water that is flowing within aquifers below the water table.
Sometimes it is useful to make a distinction between groundwater that is closely associated with surface water, and deep groundwater in an aquifer (called "fossil water" if it infiltrated into the ground millennia ago).
Groundwater can be thought of in the same terms as surface water: inputs, outputs and storage.
The natural input to groundwater is infiltration from surface water, which must then percolate downward to reach the groundwater.
The natural outputs from groundwater are springs and seepage to the oceans.
Groundwater storage can be much larger (in volume) compared to its inputs than surface water and have a slower turnover rate, though this depends on the features of the aquifer.
This difference makes it easy for humans to use groundwater unsustainably for a long time without severe consequences.
Nevertheless, over the long term the average rate of infiltration above a groundwater source plus input from streams is the upper bound for average consumption of water from that source.
Groundwater is naturally replenished by surface water from precipitation, streams, and rivers when this recharge reaches the water table.
Groundwater can be a long-term 'reservoir' of the natural water cycle (with residence times from days to millennia), as opposed to short-term water reservoirs like the atmosphere and fresh surface water (which have residence times from minutes to years).
Deep groundwater (which is quite distant from the surface recharge) can take a very long time to complete its natural cycle.
The Great Artesian Basin in central and eastern Australia is one of the largest confined aquifer systems in the world, extending for almost 2 million km2.
By analysing the trace elements in water sourced from deep underground, hydrogeologists have been able to determine that water extracted from these aquifers can be more than 1 million years old.
By comparing the age of groundwater obtained from different parts of the Great Artesian Basin, hydrogeologists have found it increases in age across the basin.
Where water recharges the aquifers along the Eastern Divide, ages are young.
As groundwater flows westward across the continent, it increases in age, with the oldest groundwater occurring in the western parts.
This means that in order to have travelled almost 1000 km from the source of recharge in 1 million years, the groundwater flowing through the Great Artesian Basin travels at an average rate of about 1 metre per year.
The high specific heat capacity of water and the insulating effect of soil and rock can mitigate the effects of climate and maintain groundwater at a relatively steady temperature.
In some places where groundwater temperatures are maintained by this effect at about 10 °C (50 °F), groundwater can be used for controlling the temperature inside structures at the surface.
For example, during hot weather relatively cool groundwater can be pumped through radiators in a home and then returned to the ground in another well.
During cold seasons, because it is relatively warm, the water can be used in the same way as a source of heat for heat pumps that is much more efficient than using air.
Groundwater makes up about thirty percent of the world's fresh water supply, which is about 0.
About 99% of the world's liquid fresh water is groundwater.
Global groundwater storage is roughly equal to the total amount of freshwater stored in the snow and ice pack, including the north and south poles.
This makes it an important resource that can act as a natural storage that can buffer against shortages of surface water, as in during times of drought.
The volume of groundwater in an aquifer can be estimated by measuring water levels in local wells and by examining geologic records from well-drilling to determine the extent, depth and thickness of water-bearing sediments and rocks.
Before an investment is made in production wells, test wells may be drilled to measure the depths at which water is encountered and collect samples of soils, rock and water for laboratory analyses.
Pumping tests can be performed in test wells to determine flow characteristics of the aquifer.
The characteristics of aquifers vary with the geology and structure of the substrate and topography in which they occur.
In general, the more productive aquifers occur in sedimentary geologic formations.
By comparison, weathered and fractured crystalline rocks yield smaller quantities of groundwater in many environments.
Unconsolidated to poorly cemented alluvial materials that have accumulated as valley-filling sediments in major river valleys and geologically subsiding structural basins are included among the most productive sources of groundwater.
Fluid flows can be altered in different lithological settings by brittle deformation of rocks in fault zones; the mechanisms by which this occurs are the subject of fault zone hydrogeology.
Reliance on groundwater will only increase, mainly due to growing water demand by all sectors combined with increasing variation in rainfall patterns.
Safe use of groundwater varies substantially by the elements present and use-cases, with significant differences between consumption for humans, livestocks and different crops.
Groundwater is the most accessed source of freshwater around the world, including as drinking water, irrigation, and manufacturing.
Groundwater accounts for about half of the world's drinking water, 40% of its irrigation water, and a third of water for industrial purposes.
Another estimate stated that globally groundwater accounts for about one third of all water withdrawals, and surface water for the other two thirds.
Groundwater provides drinking water to at least 50% of the global population.
A similar estimate was published in 2021 which stated that "groundwater is estimated to supply between a quarter and a third of the world's annual freshwater withdrawals to meet agricultural, industrial and domestic demands.
Global freshwater withdrawal was probably around 600 km3 per year in 1900 and increased to 3,880 km3 per year in 2017.
The rate of increase was especially high (around 3% per year) during the period 1950–1980, partly due to a higher population growth rate, and partly to rapidly increasing groundwater development, particularly for irrigation.
The rate of increase is (as per 2022) approximately 1% per year, in tune with the current population growth rate.
Global groundwater depletion has been calculated to be between 100 and 300 km3 per year.
This depletion is mainly caused by "expansion of irrigated agriculture in drylands".
The Asia-Pacific region is the largest groundwater abstractor in the world, containing seven out of the ten countries that extract most groundwater (Bangladesh, China, India, Indonesia, Iran, Pakistan and Turkey).
These countries alone account for roughly 60% of the world's total groundwater withdrawal.
Groundwater may or may not be a safe water source.
In fact, there is considerable uncertainty with groundwater in different hydrogeologic contexts: the widespread presence of contaminants such as arsenic, fluoride and salinity can reduce the suitability of groundwater as a drinking water source.
Arsenic and fluoride have been considered as priority contaminants at a global level, although priority chemicals will vary by country.
There is a lot of heterogeneity of hydrogeologic properties.
For this reason, salinity of groundwater is often highly variable over space.
This contributes to highly variable groundwater security risks even within a specific region.
Salinity in groundwater makes the water unpalatable and unusable and is often the worst in coastal areas, especially due to Saltwater intrusion from excessive use, which are notable in Bangladesh, and East and West India, and many island nations.
Due to climate change groundwater is warming.
The temperature of Viennese groundwater has increased by .
In a joint research project scientists at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) and the University of Vienna have tried to quantify the amount of drinking water loss to be expected due to ground water warming up to the end of the current century.
Stressing the fact that regional shallow groundwater warming patterns vary substantially due to spatial variability in climate change and water table depth these researchers write that we currently lack knowledge about how groundwater responds to surface warming across spatial and temporal scales.
Their study shows, however, that following a medium emissions pathway, in 2100 between 77 million and 188 million people are projected to live in areas where groundwater exceeds the highest threshold for drinking water temperatures (DWTs) set by any country.
Municipal and industrial water supplies are provided through large wells.
Multiple wells for one water supply source are termed "wellfields", which may withdraw water from confined or unconfined aquifers.
Using groundwater from deep, confined aquifers provides more protection from surface water contamination.
Some wells, termed "collector wells", are specifically designed to induce infiltration of surface (usually river) water.
Aquifers that provide sustainable fresh groundwater to urban areas and for agricultural irrigation are typically close to the ground surface (within a couple of hundred metres) and have some recharge by fresh water.
This recharge is typically from rivers or meteoric water (precipitation) that percolates into the aquifer through overlying unsaturated materials.
In cases where the groundwater has unacceptable levels of salinity or specific ions, desalination is a common treatment,.
However, for the brine, safe disposal or reuse is needed.
In general, the irrigation of 20% of farming land (with various types of water sources) accounts for the production of 40% of food production.
Irrigation techniques across the globe includes canals redirecting surface water, groundwater pumping, and diverting water from dams.
Aquifers are critically important in agriculture.
Deep aquifers in arid areas have long been water sources for irrigation.
A majority of extracted groundwater, 70%, is used for agricultural purposes.
Significant investigation has gone into determining safe levels of specific salts present for different agricultural uses.
In India, 65% of the irrigation is from groundwater and about 90% of extracted groundwater is used for irrigation.
Occasionally, sedimentary or "fossil" aquifers are used to provide irrigation and drinking water to urban areas.
In Libya, for example, Muammar Gaddafi's Great Manmade River project has pumped large amounts of groundwater from aquifers beneath the Sahara to populous areas near the coast.
Though this has saved Libya money over the alternative, seawater desalination, the aquifers are likely to run dry in 60 to 100 years.
First, flood mitigation schemes, intended to protect infrastructure built on floodplains, have had the unintended consequence of reducing aquifer recharge associated with natural flooding.
Second, prolonged depletion of groundwater in extensive aquifers can result in land subsidence, with associated infrastructure damage – as well as, third, saline intrusion.
Fourth, draining acid sulphate soils, often found in low-lying coastal plains, can result in acidification and pollution of formerly freshwater and estuarine streams.
Groundwater is a highly useful and often abundant resource.
Most land areas on Earth have some form of aquifer underlying them, sometimes at significant depths.
In some cases, these aquifers are rapidly being depleted by the human population.
Such over-use, over-abstraction or overdraft can cause major problems to human users and to the environment.
The most evident problem (as far as human groundwater use is concerned) is a lowering of the water table beyond the reach of existing wells.
As a consequence, wells must be drilled deeper to reach the groundwater; in some places (e.
The GRACE satellites have collected data that demonstrates 21 of Earth's 37 major aquifers are undergoing depletion.
In the Punjab region of India, for example, groundwater levels have dropped 10 meters since 1979, and the rate of depletion is accelerating.
A lowered water table may, in turn, cause other problems such as groundwater-related subsidence and saltwater intrusion.
Another cause for concern is that groundwater drawdown from over-allocated aquifers has the potential to cause severe damage to both terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems – in some cases very conspicuously but in others quite imperceptibly because of the extended period over which the damage occurs.
The importance of groundwater to ecosystems is often overlooked, even by freshwater biologists and ecologists.
Groundwaters sustain rivers, wetlands, and lakes, as well as subterranean ecosystems within karst or alluvial aquifers.
Not all ecosystems need groundwater, of course.
Some terrestrial ecosystems – for example, those of the open deserts and similar arid environments – exist on irregular rainfall and the moisture it delivers to the soil, supplemented by moisture in the air.
While there are other terrestrial ecosystems in more hospitable environments where groundwater plays no central role, groundwater is in fact fundamental to many of the world's major ecosystems.
Water flows between groundwaters and surface waters.
Most rivers, lakes, and wetlands are fed by, and (at other places or times) feed groundwater, to varying degrees.
Groundwater feeds soil moisture through percolation, and many terrestrial vegetation communities depend directly on either groundwater or the percolated soil moisture above the aquifer for at least part of each year.
Hyporheic zones (the mixing zone of streamwater and groundwater) and riparian zones are examples of ecotones largely or totally dependent on groundwater.
A 2021 study found that of ~39 million investigated groundwater wells 6–20% are at high risk of running dry if local groundwater levels decline by a few meters, or – as with many areas and possibly more than half of major aquifers – continue to decline.
Fresh-water aquifers, especially those with limited recharge by snow or rain, also known as meteoric water, can be over-exploited and depending on the local hydrogeology, may draw in non-potable water or saltwater intrusion from hydraulically connected aquifers or surface water bodies.
This can be a serious problem, especially in coastal areas and other areas where aquifer pumping is excessive.
Subsidence occurs when too much water is pumped out from underground, deflating the space below the above-surface, and thus causing the ground to collapse.
The result can look like craters on plots of land.
This occurs because, in its natural equilibrium state, the hydraulic pressure of groundwater in the pore spaces of the aquifer and the aquitard supports some of the weight of the overlying sediments.
When groundwater is removed from aquifers by excessive pumping, pore pressures in the aquifer drop and compression of the aquifer may occur.
This compression may be partially recoverable if pressures rebound, but much of it is not.
When the aquifer gets compressed, it may cause land subsidence, a drop in the ground surface.
In unconsolidated aquifers, groundwater is produced from pore spaces between particles of gravel, sand, and silt.
If the aquifer is confined by low-permeability layers, the reduced water pressure in the sand and gravel causes slow drainage of water from the adjoining confining layers.
If these confining layers are composed of compressible silt or clay, the loss of water to the aquifer reduces the water pressure in the confining layer, causing it to compress from the weight of overlying geologic materials.
In severe cases, this compression can be observed on the ground surface as subsidence.
Unfortunately, much of the subsidence from groundwater extraction is permanent (elastic rebound is small).
Thus, the subsidence is not only permanent, but the compressed aquifer has a permanently reduced capacity to hold water.
The city of New Orleans, Louisiana is actually below sea level today, and its subsidence is partly caused by removal of groundwater from the various aquifer/aquitard systems beneath it.
In the first half of the 20th century, the San Joaquin Valley experienced significant subsidence, in some places up to 8.
Cities on river deltas, including Venice in Italy, and Bangkok in Thailand, have experienced surface subsidence; Mexico City, built on a former lake bed, has experienced rates of subsidence of up to 40 centimetres (1 foot 4 inches) per year.
For coastal cities, subsidence can increase the risk of other environmental issues, such as sea level rise.
For example, Bangkok is expected to have 5.
If the surface water source is also subject to substantial evaporation, a groundwater source may become saline.
This situation can occur naturally under endorheic bodies of water, or artificially under irrigated farmland.
In coastal areas, human use of a groundwater source may cause the direction of seepage to ocean to reverse which can also cause soil salinization.
As water moves through the landscape, it collects soluble salts, mainly sodium chloride.
Where such water enters the atmosphere through evapotranspiration, these salts are left behind.
In irrigation districts, poor drainage of soils and surface aquifers can result in water tables' coming to the surface in low-lying areas.
Major land degradation problems of soil salinity and waterlogging result, combined with increasing levels of salt in surface waters.
As a consequence, major damage has occurred to local economies and environments.
Aquifers in surface irrigated areas in semi-arid zones with reuse of the unavoidable irrigation water losses percolating down into the underground by supplemental irrigation from wells run the risk of salination.
Surface irrigation water normally contains salts in the order of 0.
Under the influence of continuous evaporation, the salt concentration of the aquifer water may increase continually and eventually cause an environmental problem.
For salinity control in such a case, annually an amount of drainage water is to be discharged from the aquifer by means of a subsurface drainage system and disposed of through a safe outlet.
The drainage system may be horizontal (i.
To estimate the drainage requirement, the use of a groundwater model with an agro-hydro-salinity component may be instrumental, e.
Aquifers near the coast have a lens of freshwater near the surface and denser seawater under freshwater.
Seawater penetrates the aquifer diffusing in from the ocean and is denser than freshwater.
This relationship is called the Ghyben-Herzberg equation.
If too much groundwater is pumped near the coast, salt-water may intrude into freshwater aquifers causing contamination of potable freshwater supplies.
Many coastal aquifers, such as the Biscayne Aquifer near Miami and the New Jersey Coastal Plain aquifer, have problems with saltwater intrusion as a result of overpumping and sea level rise.
Seawater intrusion is the flow or presence of seawater into coastal aquifers; it is a case of saltwater intrusion.
It is a natural phenomenon but can also be caused or worsened by anthropogenic factors, such as sea level rise due to climate change.
In the case of homogeneous aquifers, seawater intrusion forms a saline wedge below a transition zone to fresh groundwater, flowing seaward on the top.
These changes can have other effects on the land above the groundwater.
For example, coastal groundwater in California would rise in many aquifers, increasing risks of flooding and runoff challenges.
Sea level rise causes the mixing of sea water into the coastal groundwater, rendering it unusable once it amounts to more than 2–3% of the reservoir.
Along an estimated 15% of the US coastline, the majority of local groundwater levels are already below the sea level.
The impacts of climate change on groundwater may be greatest through its indirect effects on irrigation water demand via increased evapotranspiration.
There is an observed declined in groundwater storage in many parts of the world.
This is due to more groundwater being used for irrigation activities in agriculture, particularly in drylands.
Some of this increase in irrigation can be due to water scarcity issues made worse by effects of climate change on the water cycle.
Direct redistribution of water by human activities amounting to ~24,000 km3 per year is about double the global groundwater recharge each year.
Climate change causes changes to the water cycle which in turn affect groundwater in several ways: There can be a decline in groundwater storage, and reduction in groundwater recharge and water quality deterioration due to extreme weather events.
In the tropics intense precipitation and flooding events appear to lead to more groundwater recharge.
However, the exact impacts of climate change on groundwater are still under investigation.
This is because scientific data derived from groundwater monitoring is still missing, such as changes in space and time, abstraction data and "numerical representations of groundwater recharge processes".
Effects of climate change could have different impacts on groundwater storage: The expected more intense (but fewer) major rainfall events could lead to increased groundwater recharge in many environments.
But more intense drought periods could result in soil drying-out and compaction which would reduce infiltration to groundwater.
For the higher altitudes regions, the reduced duration and amount of snow may lead to reduced recharge of groundwater in spring.
The impacts of receding alpine glaciers on groundwater systems are not well understood.
Global sea level rise due to climate change has induced seawater intrusion into coastal aquifers around the world, particularly in low-lying areas and small islands.
However, groundwater abstraction is usually the main reason for seawater intrusion, rather than sea level rise (see in section on seawater intrusion).
Seawater intrusion threatens coastal ecosystems and livelihood resilience.
Bangladesh is a vulnerable country for this issue, and mangrove forest of Sundarbans is a vulnerable ecosystem.
Groundwater pollution may also increase indirectly due to climate change: More frequent and intense storms can pollute groundwater by mobilizing contaminants, for example fertilizers, wastewater or human excreta from pit latrines.
Droughts reduce river dilution capacities and groundwater levels, increasing the risk of groundwater contamination.
Using more groundwater, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa, is seen as a method for climate change adaptation in the case that climate change causes more intense or frequent droughts.
Groundwater-based adaptations to climate change exploit distributed groundwater storage and the capacity of aquifer systems to store seasonal or episodic water surpluses.
They incur substantially lower evaporative losses than conventional infrastructure, such as surface dams.
For example, in tropical Africa, pumping water from groundwater storage can help to improve the climate resilience of water and food supplies.
The development of geothermal energy, a sustainable energy source, plays an important role in reducing CO2 emissions and thus mitigating climate change.
Groundwater is an agent in the storage, movement, and extraction of geothermal energy.
In pioneering nations, such as the Netherlands and Sweden, the ground/groundwater is increasingly seen as just one component (a seasonal source, sink or thermal 'buffer') in district heating and cooling networks.
Deep aquifers can also be used for carbon capture and sequestration, the process of storing carbon to curb accumulation of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
Groundwater governance processes enable groundwater management, planning and policy implementation.
It takes place at multiple scales and geographic levels, including regional and transboundary scales.
Groundwater management is action-oriented, focusing on practical implementation activities and day-to-day operations.
Because groundwater is often perceived as a private resource (that is, closely connected to land ownership, and in some jurisdictions treated as privately owned), regulation and top–down governance and management are difficult.
Governments need to fully assume their role as resource custodians in view of the common-good aspects of groundwater.
Domestic laws and regulations regulate access to groundwater as well as human activities that impact the quality of groundwater.
Legal frameworks also need to include protection of discharge and recharge zones and of the area surrounding water supply wells, as well as sustainable yield norms and abstraction controls, and conjunctive use regulations.
In some jurisdictions, groundwater is regulated in conjunction with surface water, including rivers.
Groundwater is an important water resource for the supply of drinking water, especially in arid countries.
The Arab region is one of the most water-scarce in the world and groundwater is the most relied-upon water source in at least 11 of the 22 Arab states.
Over-extraction of groundwater in many parts of the region has led to groundwater table declines, especially in highly populated and agricultural areas.
Soil mechanics is a branch of soil physics and applied mechanics that describes the behavior of soils.
It differs from fluid mechanics and solid mechanics in the sense that soils consist of a heterogeneous mixture of fluids (usually air and water) and particles (usually clay, silt, sand, and gravel) but soil may also contain organic solids and other matter.
Along with rock mechanics, soil mechanics provides the theoretical basis for analysis in geotechnical engineering, a subdiscipline of civil engineering, and engineering geology, a subdiscipline of geology.
Soil mechanics is used to analyze the deformations of and flow of fluids within natural and man-made structures that are supported on or made of soil, or structures that are buried in soils.
Example applications are building and bridge foundations, retaining walls, dams, and buried pipeline systems.
Principles of soil mechanics are also used in related disciplines such as geophysical engineering, coastal engineering, agricultural engineering, and hydrology.
This article describes the genesis and composition of soil, the distinction between pore water pressure and inter-granular effective stress, capillary action of fluids in the soil pore spaces, soil classification, seepage and permeability, time dependent change of volume due to squeezing water out of tiny pore spaces, also known as consolidation, shear strength and stiffness of soils.
The shear strength of soils is primarily derived from friction between the particles and interlocking, which are very sensitive to the effective stress.
The article concludes with some examples of applications of the principles of soil mechanics such as slope stability, lateral earth pressure on retaining walls, and bearing capacity of foundations.
The primary mechanism of soil creation is the weathering of rock.
All rock types (igneous rock, metamorphic rock and sedimentary rock) may be broken down into small particles to create soil.
Weathering mechanisms are physical weathering, chemical weathering, and biological weathering Human activities such as excavation, blasting, and waste disposal, may also create soil.
Over geologic time, deeply buried soils may be altered by pressure and temperature to become metamorphic or sedimentary rock, and if melted and solidified again, they would complete the geologic cycle by becoming igneous rock.
Physical weathering includes temperature effects, freeze and thaw of water in cracks, rain, wind, impact and other mechanisms.
Chemical weathering includes dissolution of matter composing a rock and precipitation in the form of another mineral.
Clay minerals, for example can be formed by weathering of feldspar, which is the most common mineral present in igneous rock.
The most common mineral constituent of silt and sand is quartz, also called silica, which has the chemical name silicon dioxide.
The reason that feldspar is most common in rocks but silica is more prevalent in soils is that feldspar is much more soluble than silica.
Silt, Sand, and Gravel are basically little pieces of broken rocks.
According to the Unified Soil Classification System, silt particle sizes are in the range of 0.
Gravel particles are broken pieces of rock in the size range 4.
Particles larger than gravel are called cobbles and boulders.
Soil deposits are affected by the mechanism of transport and deposition to their location.
Soils that are not transported are called residual soils—they exist at the same location as the rock from which they were generated.
Decomposed granite is a common example of a residual soil.
The common mechanisms of transport are the actions of gravity, ice, water, and wind.
Wind blown soils include dune sands and loess.
Water carries particles of different size depending on the speed of the water, thus soils transported by water are graded according to their size.
Silt and clay may settle out in a lake, and gravel and sand collect at the bottom of a river bed.
Wind blown soil deposits (aeolian soils) also tend to be sorted according to their grain size.
Erosion at the base of glaciers is powerful enough to pick up large rocks and boulders as well as soil; soils dropped by melting ice can be a well graded mixture of widely varying particle sizes.
Gravity on its own may also carry particles down from the top of a mountain to make a pile of soil and boulders at the base; soil deposits transported by gravity are called colluvium.
The mechanism of transport also has a major effect on the particle shape.
For example, low velocity grinding in a river bed will produce rounded particles.
Freshly fractured colluvium particles often have a very angular shape.
Silts, sands and gravels are classified by their size, and hence they may consist of a variety of minerals.
Owing to the stability of quartz compared to other rock minerals, quartz is the most common constituent of sand and silt.
Mica, and feldspar are other common minerals present in sands and silts.
The mineral constituents of gravel may be more similar to that of the parent rock.
The common clay minerals are montmorillonite or smectite, illite, and kaolinite or kaolin.
These minerals tend to form in sheet or plate like structures, with length typically ranging between 10−7 m and 4×10−6 m and thickness typically ranging between 10−9 m and 2×10−6 m, and they have a relatively large specific surface area.
The specific surface area (SSA) is defined as the ratio of the surface area of particles to the mass of the particles.
Clay minerals typically have specific surface areas in the range of 10 to 1,000 square meters per gram of solid.
Due to the large surface area available for chemical, electrostatic, and van der Waals interaction, the mechanical behavior of clay minerals is very sensitive to the amount of pore fluid available and the type and amount of dissolved ions in the pore fluid.
The minerals of soils are predominantly formed by atoms of oxygen, silicon, hydrogen, and aluminum, organized in various crystalline forms.
These elements along with calcium, sodium, potassium, magnesium, and carbon constitute over 99 per cent of the solid mass of soils.
Soils consist of a mixture of particles of different size, shape and mineralogy.
Because the size of the particles obviously has a significant effect on the soil behavior, the grain size and grain size distribution are used to classify soils.
The grain size distribution describes the relative proportions of particles of various sizes.
The grain size is often visualized in a cumulative distribution graph which, for example, plots the percentage of particles finer than a given size as a function of size.
Sands and gravels that possess a wide range of particle sizes with a smooth distribution of particle sizes are called well graded soils.
If the soil particles in a sample are predominantly in a relatively narrow range of sizes, the sample is uniformly graded.
If a soil sample has distinct gaps in the gradation curve, e.
Uniformly graded and gap graded soils are both considered to be poorly graded.
There are many methods for measuring particle-size distribution.
The two traditional methods are sieve analysis and hydrometer analysis.
The size distribution of gravel and sand particles are typically measured using sieve analysis.
The formal procedure is described in ASTM D6913-04(2009).
A stack of sieves with accurately dimensioned holes between a mesh of wires is used to separate the particles into size bins.
A known volume of dried soil, with clods broken down to individual particles, is put into the top of a stack of sieves arranged from coarse to fine.
The stack of sieves is shaken for a standard period of time so that the particles are sorted into size bins.
This method works reasonably well for particles in the sand and gravel size range.
Fine particles tend to stick to each other, and hence the sieving process is not an effective method.
If there are a lot of fines (silt and clay) present in the soil it may be necessary to run water through the sieves to wash the coarse particles and clods through.
A variety of sieve sizes are available.
The boundary between sand and silt is arbitrary.
According to the Unified Soil Classification System, a #4 sieve (4 openings per inch) having 4.
According to the British standard, 0.
The classification of fine-grained soils, i.
If it is important to determine the grain size distribution of fine-grained soils, the hydrometer test may be performed.
In the hydrometer tests, the soil particles are mixed with water and shaken to produce a dilute suspension in a glass cylinder, and then the cylinder is left to sit.
A hydrometer is used to measure the density of the suspension as a function of time.
Clay particles may take several hours to settle past the depth of measurement of the hydrometer.
Sand particles may take less than a second.
Stokes' law provides the theoretical basis to calculate the relationship between sedimentation velocity and particle size.
ASTM provides the detailed procedures for performing the Hydrometer test.
Clay particles can be sufficiently small that they never settle because they are kept in suspension by Brownian motion, in which case they may be classified as colloids.
There are a variety of parameters used to describe the relative proportions of air, water and solid in a soil.
This section defines these parameters and some of their interrelationships.
Note that the weights, W, can be obtained by multiplying the mass, M, by the acceleration due to gravity, g; e.
It is easily measured by weighing a sample of the soil, drying it out in an oven and re-weighing.
Standard procedures are described by ASTM.
From the above definitions, some useful relationships can be derived by use of basic algebra.
Geotechnical engineers classify the soil particle types by performing tests on disturbed (dried, passed through sieves, and remolded) samples of the soil.
This provides information about the characteristics of the soil grains themselves.
Classification of the types of grains present in a soil does not account for important effects of the structure or fabric of the soil, terms that describe compactness of the particles and patterns in the arrangement of particles in a load carrying framework as well as the pore size and pore fluid distributions.
Engineering geologists also classify soils based on their genesis and depositional history.
In the US and other countries, the Unified Soil Classification System (USCS) is often used for soil classification.
Other classification systems include the British Standard BS 5930 and the AASHTO soil classification system.
In the USCS, gravels (given the symbol G) and sands (given the symbol S) are classified according to their grain size distribution.
For the USCS, gravels may be given the classification symbol GW (well-graded gravel), GP (poorly graded gravel), GM (gravel with a large amount of silt), or GC (gravel with a large amount of clay).
Likewise sands may be classified as being SW, SP, SM or SC.
Sands and gravels with a small but non-negligible amount of fines (5–12%) may be given a dual classification such as SW-SC.
The liquid limit is the water content at which the soil behavior transitions from a plastic solid to a liquid.
The plastic limit is the water content at which the soil behavior transitions from that of a plastic solid to a brittle solid.
The Shrinkage Limit corresponds to a water content below which the soil will not shrink as it dries.
The consistency of fine grained soil varies in proportional to the water content in a soil.
As the transitions from one state to another are gradual, the tests have adopted arbitrary definitions to determine the boundaries of the states.
The liquid limit is determined by measuring the water content for which a groove closes after 25 blows in a standard test.
Alternatively, a fall cone test apparatus may be used to measure the liquid limit.
The undrained shear strength of remolded soil at the liquid limit is approximately 2 kPa.
The plastic limit is the water content below which it is not possible to roll by hand the soil into 3 mm diameter cylinders.
The soil cracks or breaks up as it is rolled down to this diameter.
Remolded soil at the plastic limit is quite stiff, having an undrained shear strength of the order of about 200 kPa.
The plasticity index of a particular soil specimen is defined as the difference between the liquid limit and the plastic limit of the specimen; it is an indicator of how much water the soil particles in the specimen can absorb, and correlates with many engineering properties like permeability, compressibility, shear strength and others.
Generally, the clay having high plasticity have lower permeability and also they are also difficult to be compacted.
According to the Unified Soil Classification System (USCS), silts and clays are classified by plotting the values of their plasticity index and liquid limit on a plasticity chart.
The A-Line on the chart separates clays (given the USCS symbol C) from silts (given the symbol M).
LL=50% separates high plasticity soils (given the modifier symbol H) from low plasticity soils (given the modifier symbol L).
A soil that plots above the A-line and has LL>50% would, for example, be classified as CH.
Other possible classifications of silts and clays are ML, CL and MH.
If the Atterberg limits plot in the"hatched" region on the graph near the origin, the soils are given the dual classification 'CL-ML'.
When the LI is 1, remolded soil is at the liquid limit and it has an undrained shear strength of about 2 kPa.
When the soil is at the plastic limit, the LI is 0 and the undrained shear strength is about 200 kPa.
Methods used to calculate relative density are defined in ASTM D4254-00(2006).
To understand the mechanics of soils it is necessary to understand how normal stresses and shear stresses are shared by the different phases.
Neither gas nor liquid provide significant resistance to shear stress.
The shear resistance of soil is provided by friction and interlocking of the particles.
The friction depends on the intergranular contact stresses between solid particles.
The normal stresses, on the other hand, are shared by the fluid and the particles.
Although the pore air is relatively compressible, and hence takes little normal stress in most geotechnical problems, liquid water is relatively incompressible and if the voids are saturated with water, the pore water must be squeezed out in order to pack the particles closer together.
The principle of effective stress, introduced by Karl Terzaghi, states that the effective stress σ' (i.
It is not practical to measure σ' directly, so in practice the vertical effective stress is calculated from the pore pressure and vertical total stress.
The distinction between the terms pressure and stress is also important.
By definition, pressure at a point is equal in all directions but stresses at a point can be different in different directions.
In soil mechanics, compressive stresses and pressures are considered to be positive and tensile stresses are considered to be negative, which is different from the solid mechanics sign convention for stress.
If there are multiple layers of soil or water above the point of interest, the vertical stress may be calculated by summing the product of the unit weight and thickness of all of the overlying layers.
Total stress increases with increasing depth in proportion to the density of the overlying soil.
It is not possible to calculate the horizontal total stress in this way.
Lateral earth pressures are addressed elsewhere.
If the soil pores are filled with water that is not flowing but is static, the pore water pressures will be hydrostatic.
The water table is located at the depth where the water pressure is equal to the atmospheric pressure.
Due to surface tension, water will rise up in a small capillary tube above a free surface of water.
Likewise, water will rise up above the water table into the small pore spaces around the soil particles.
In fact the soil may be completely saturated for some distance above the water table.
Above the height of capillary saturation, the soil may be wet but the water content will decrease with elevation.
Hence, hydrostatic water pressures are negative above the water table.
The thickness of the zone of capillary saturation depends on the pore size, but typically, the heights vary between a centimeter or so for coarse sand to tens of meters for a silt or clay.
In fact the pore space of soil is a uniform fractal e.
For the clay soil it has been found that L=0.
The surface tension of water explains why the water does not drain out of a wet sand castle or a moist ball of clay.
Negative water pressures make the water stick to the particles and pull the particles to each other, friction at the particle contacts make a sand castle stable.
But as soon as a wet sand castle is submerged below a free water surface, the negative pressures are lost and the castle collapses.
The negative pore pressure pulls the particles together and causes compressive particle to particle contact forces.
Negative pore pressures in clayey soil can be much more powerful than those in sand.
Negative pore pressures explain why clay soils shrink when they dry and swell as they are wetted.
The swelling and shrinkage can cause major distress, especially to light structures and roads.
Later sections of this article address the pore water pressures for seepage and consolidation problems.
Consolidation is a process by which soils decrease in volume.
It occurs when stress is applied to a soil that causes the soil particles to pack together more tightly, therefore reducing volume.
When this occurs in a soil that is saturated with water, water will be squeezed out of the soil.
The time required to squeeze the water out of a thick deposit of clayey soil layer might be years.
For a layer of sand, the water may be squeezed out in a matter of seconds.
A building foundation or construction of a new embankment will cause the soil below to consolidate and this will cause settlement which in turn may cause distress to the building or embankment.
Karl Terzaghi developed the theory of one-dimensional consolidation which enables prediction of the amount of settlement and the time required for the settlement to occur.
Afterwards, Maurice Biot fully developed the three-dimensional soil consolidation theory, extending the one-dimensional model previously developed by Terzaghi to more general hypotheses and introducing the set of basic equations of Poroelasticity.
Soils are tested with an oedometer test to determine their compression index and coefficient of consolidation.
When stress is removed from a consolidated soil, the soil will rebound, drawing water back into the pores and regaining some of the volume it had lost in the consolidation process.
If the stress is reapplied, the soil will re-consolidate again along a recompression curve, defined by the recompression index.
Soil that has been consolidated to a large pressure and has been subsequently unloaded is considered to be overconsolidated.
The maximum past vertical effective stress is termed the preconsolidation stress.
A soil which is currently experiencing the maximum past vertical effective stress is said to be normally consolidated.
The overconsolidation ratio, (OCR) is the ratio of the maximum past vertical effective stress to the current vertical effective stress.
The OCR is significant for two reasons: firstly, because the compressibility of normally consolidated soil is significantly larger than that for overconsolidated soil, and secondly, the shear behavior and dilatancy of clayey soil are related to the OCR through critical state soil mechanics; highly overconsolidated clayey soils are dilatant, while normally consolidated soils tend to be contractive.
The shear strength and stiffness of soil determines whether or not soil will be stable or how much it will deform.
Knowledge of the strength is necessary to determine if a slope will be stable, if a building or bridge might settle too far into the ground, and the limiting pressures on a retaining wall.
It is important to distinguish between failure of a soil element and the failure of a geotechnical structure (e.
Different criteria can be used to define the "shear strength" and the "yield point" for a soil element from a stress–strain curve.
One may define the peak shear strength as the peak of a stress–strain curve, or the shear strength at critical state as the value after large strains when the shear resistance levels off.
If the stress–strain curve does not stabilize before the end of shear strength test, the "strength" is sometimes considered to be the shear resistance at 15–20% strain.
The shear strength of soil depends on many factors including the effective stress and the void ratio.
The shear stiffness is important, for example, for evaluation of the magnitude of deformations of foundations and slopes prior to failure and because it is related to the shear wave velocity.
The slope of the initial, nearly linear, portion of a plot of shear stress as a function of shear strain is called the shear modulus.
Soil is an assemblage of particles that have little to no cementation while rock (such as sandstone) may consist of an assembly of particles that are strongly cemented together by chemical bonds.
The shear strength of soil is primarily due to interparticle friction and therefore, the shear resistance on a plane is approximately proportional to the effective normal stress on that plane.
The angle of internal friction is thus closely related to the maximum stable slope angle, often called the angle of repose.
But in addition to friction, soil derives significant shear resistance from interlocking of grains.
If the grains are densely packed, the grains tend to spread apart from each other as they are subject to shear strain.
The expansion of the particle matrix due to shearing was called dilatancy by Osborne Reynolds.
If one considers the energy required to shear an assembly of particles there is energy input by the shear force, T, moving a distance, × and there is also energy input by the normal force, N, as the sample expands a distance, y.
Due to the extra energy required for the particles to dilate against the confining pressures, dilatant soils have a greater peak strength than contractive soils.
Furthermore, as dilative soil grains dilate, they become looser (their void ratio increases), and their rate of dilation decreases until they reach a critical void ratio.
Contractive soils become denser as they shear, and their rate of contraction decreases until they reach a critical void ratio.
The tendency for a soil to dilate or contract depends primarily on the confining pressure and the void ratio of the soil.
The rate of dilation is high if the confining pressure is small and the void ratio is small.
The rate of contraction is high if the confining pressure is large and the void ratio is large.
As a first approximation, the regions of contraction and dilation are separated by the critical state line.
The peak strength of the soil may be greater, however, due to the interlocking (dilatancy) contribution.
However, use of a friction angle greater than the critical state value for design requires care.
The peak strength will not be mobilized everywhere at the same time in a practical problem such as a foundation, slope or retaining wall.
The critical state friction angle is not nearly as variable as the peak friction angle and hence it can be relied upon with confidence.
In addition to the friction and interlocking (dilatancy) components of strength, the structure and fabric also play a significant role in the soil behavior.
The structure and fabric include factors such as the spacing and arrangement of the solid particles or the amount and spatial distribution of pore water; in some cases cementitious material accumulates at particle-particle contacts.
Mechanical behavior of soil is affected by the density of the particles and their structure or arrangement of the particles as well as the amount and spatial distribution of fluids present (e.
Other factors include the electrical charge of the particles, chemistry of pore water, chemical bonds (i.
The presence of nearly incompressible fluids such as water in the pore spaces affects the ability for the pores to dilate or contract.
If the pores are saturated with water, water must be sucked into the dilating pore spaces to fill the expanding pores (this phenomenon is visible at the beach when apparently dry spots form around feet that press into the wet sand).
Similarly, for contractive soil, water must be squeezed out of the pore spaces to allow contraction to take place.
Dilation of the voids causes negative water pressures that draw fluid into the pores, and contraction of the voids causes positive pore pressures to push the water out of the pores.
If the rate of shearing is very large compared to the rate that water can be sucked into or squeezed out of the dilating or contracting pore spaces, then the shearing is called undrained shear, if the shearing is slow enough that the water pressures are negligible, the shearing is called drained shear.
During undrained shear, the water pressure u changes depending on volume change tendencies.
It follows then that the undrained shear strength of a soil may be smaller or larger than the drained shear strength depending upon whether the soil is contractive or dilative.
Strength parameters can be measured in the laboratory using direct shear test, triaxial shear test, simple shear test, fall cone test and (hand) shear vane test; there are numerous other devices and variations on these devices used in practice today.
Tests conducted to characterize the strength and stiffness of the soils in the ground include the Cone penetration test and the Standard penetration test.
State can be described by terms such as: loose, dense, overconsolidated, normally consolidated, stiff, soft, contractive, dilative, etc.
Features such as layers, joints, fissures, slickensides, voids, pockets, cementation, etc.
Structure of soils is described by terms such as: undisturbed, disturbed, remolded, compacted, cemented; flocculent, honey-combed, single-grained; flocculated, deflocculated; stratified, layered, laminated; isotropic and anisotropic.
Loading conditions: Effective stress path - drained, undrained, and type of loading - magnitude, rate (static, dynamic), and time history (monotonic, cyclic).
Lateral earth stress theory is used to estimate the amount of stress soil can exert perpendicular to gravity.
This is the stress exerted on retaining walls.
A lateral earth stress coefficient, K, is defined as the ratio of lateral (horizontal) effective stress to vertical effective stress for cohesionless soils (K=σ'h/σ'v).
There are three coefficients: at-rest, active, and passive.
At-rest stress is the lateral stress in the ground before any disturbance takes place.
The active stress state is reached when a wall moves away from the soil under the influence of lateral stress, and results from shear failure due to reduction of lateral stress.
The passive stress state is reached when a wall is pushed into the soil far enough to cause shear failure within the mass due to increase of lateral stress.
There are many theories for estimating lateral earth stress; some are empirically based, and some are analytically derived.
The bearing capacity of soil is the average contact stress between a foundation and the soil which will cause shear failure in the soil.
Allowable bearing stress is the bearing capacity divided by a factor of safety.
Sometimes, on soft soil sites, large settlements may occur under loaded foundations without actual shear failure occurring; in such cases, the allowable bearing stress is determined with regard to the maximum allowable settlement.
It is important during construction and design stage of a project to evaluate the subgrade strength.
The California Bearing Ratio (CBR) test is commonly used to determine the suitability of a soil as a subgrade for design and construction.
The field Plate Load Test is commonly used to predict the deformations and failure characteristics of the soil/subgrade and modulus of subgrade reaction (ks).
The Modulus of subgrade reaction (ks) is used in foundation design, soil-structure interaction studies and design of highway pavements.
Field-based methods are commonly used to assess soil stiffness and bearing capacity under in-situ conditions.
In addition to traditional approaches, lightweight deflectometer (LWD) testing has gained attention as a rapid and portable method for evaluating near-surface soil behaviour.
LWD measurements can be used to estimate stiffness parameters and have shown strong correlation with fundamental engineering properties such as resilient modulus and deformation characteristics.
Further developments have demonstrated that LWD data can be integrated into mechanistic–empirical analysis and numerical modelling to improve predictions of pavement response and soil behaviour under loading.
Recent analytical work has also extended classical stress distribution approaches to better represent soil response under dynamic LWD loading, providing improved interpretation of in-situ measurements.
The field of slope stability encompasses the analysis of static and dynamic stability of slopes of earth and rock-fill dams, slopes of other types of embankments, excavated slopes, and natural slopes in soil and soft rock.
As seen to the right, earthen slopes can develop a cut-spherical weakness zone.
The probability of this happening can be calculated in advance using a simple 2-D circular analysis package.
A primary difficulty with analysis is locating the most-probable slip plane for any given situation.
Many landslides have been analyzed only after the fact.
Rock strength are two factors for consideration.
A recent finding in soil mechanics is that soil deformation can be described as the behavior of a dynamical system.
This approach to soil mechanics is referred to as Dynamical Systems based Soil Mechanics (DSSM).
DSSM holds simply that soil deformation is a Poisson process in which particles move to their final position at random shear strains.
The basis of DSSM is that soils (including sands) can be sheared till they reach a steady-state condition at which, under conditions of constant strain-rate, there is no change in shear stress, effective confining stress, and void ratio.
The steady-state was formally defined by Steve J.
Poulos Archived 2020-10-17 at the Wayback Machine an associate professor at the Soil Mechanics Department of Harvard University, who built off a hypothesis that Arthur Casagrande was formulating towards the end of his career.
The steady state condition is not the same as the "critical state" condition.
It differs from the critical state in that it specifies a statistically constant structure at the steady state.
The steady-state values are also very slightly dependent on the strain-rate.
Many systems in nature reach steady states, and dynamical systems theory describes such systems.
Soil shear can also be described as a dynamical system.
The physical basis of the soil shear dynamical system is a Poisson process in which particles move to the steady-state at random shear strains.
Joseph generalized this—particles move to their final position (not just steady-state) at random shear-strains.
Because of its origins in the steady state concept, DSSM is sometimes informally called "Harvard soil mechanics.
DSSM provides for very close fits to stress–strain curves, including for sands.
Because it tracks conditions on the failure plane, it also provides close fits for the post failure region of sensitive clays and silts something that other theories are not able to do.
Additionally DSSM explains key relationships in soil mechanics that to date have simply been taken for granted, for example, why normalized undrained peak shear strengths vary with the log of the overconsolidation ratio and why stress–strain curves normalize with the initial effective confining stress; and why in one-dimensional consolidation the void ratio must vary with the log of the effective vertical stress, why the end-of-primary curve is unique for static load increments, and why the ratio of the creep value Cα to the compression index Cc must be approximately constant for a wide range of soils.
Among modern in-situ testing techniques, the lightweight deflectometer (LWD) provides a rapid method for estimating soil stiffness and deformation characteristics.
Its portability and efficiency make it particularly suitable for field evaluation of subgrades and unbound materials in road engineering applications.
Water resources are natural resources of water that are potentially useful for humans, for example as a source of drinking water supply or irrigation water.
These resources can be either freshwater from natural sources, or water produced artificially from other sources, such as from reclaimed water (wastewater) or desalinated water (seawater).
The remaining unfrozen freshwater is found mainly as groundwater, with only a small fraction present above ground or in the air.
Natural sources of fresh water include frozen water, groundwater, surface water, and under river flow.
People use water resources for agricultural, household, and industrial activities.
Water resources are under threat from multiple issues.
There is water scarcity, water pollution, water conflict and climate change.
Fresh water is in principle a renewable resource.
However, the world's supply of groundwater is steadily decreasing.
Groundwater depletion (or overdrafting) is occurring for example in Asia, South America and North America.
Natural sources of fresh water include surface water, under river flow, groundwater and frozen water.
Surface water is water in a river, lake or fresh water wetland.
Surface water is naturally replenished by precipitation and naturally lost through discharge to the oceans, evaporation, evapotranspiration and groundwater recharge.
The only natural input to any surface water system is precipitation within its watershed.
The total quantity of water in that system at any given time is also dependent on many other factors.
These factors include storage capacity in lakes, wetlands and artificial reservoirs, the permeability of the soil beneath these storage bodies, the runoff characteristics of the land in the watershed, the timing of the precipitation and local evaporation rates.
All of these factors also affect the proportions of water loss.
Humans often increase storage capacity by constructing reservoirs and decrease it by draining wetlands.
Humans often increase runoff quantities and velocities by paving areas and channelizing the stream flow.
Natural surface water can be augmented by importing surface water from another watershed through a canal or pipeline.
Brazil is estimated to have the largest supply of fresh water in the world, followed by Russia and Canada.
Glacier runoff is considered to be surface water.
The Himalayas, which are often called "The Roof of the World", contain some of the most extensive and rough high altitude areas on Earth as well as the greatest area of glaciers and permafrost outside of the poles.
Ten of Asia's largest rivers flow from there, and more than a billion people's livelihoods depend on them.
To complicate matters, temperatures there are rising more rapidly than the global average.
In Nepal, the temperature has risen by 0.
Throughout the course of a river, the total volume of water transported downstream will often be a combination of the visible free water flow together with a substantial contribution flowing through rocks and sediments that underlie the river and its floodplain called the hyporheic zone.
For many rivers in large valleys, this unseen component of flow may greatly exceed the visible flow.
The hyporheic zone often forms a dynamic interface between surface water and groundwater from aquifers, exchanging flow between rivers and aquifers that may be fully charged or depleted.
This is especially significant in karst areas where pot-holes and underground rivers are common.
There are several artificial sources of fresh water.
One is treated wastewater (reclaimed water).
Another is atmospheric water generators.
Desalinated seawater is another important source.
It is important to consider the economic and environmental side effects of these technologies.
Researchers proposed air capture over oceans which would "significantly increasing freshwater through the capture of humid air over oceans" to address present and, especially, future water scarcity/insecurity.
A 2021 study proposed hypothetical portable solar-powered atmospheric water harvesting devices.
However, such off-the-grid generation may sometimes "undermine efforts to develop permanent piped infrastructure" among other problems.
The total quantity of water available at any given time is an important consideration.
Some human water users have an intermittent need for water.
For example, many farms require large quantities of water in the spring, and no water at all in the winter.
Other users have a continuous need for water, such as a power plant that requires water for cooling.
Over the long term the average rate of precipitation within a watershed is the upper bound for average consumption of natural surface water from that watershed.
It is estimated that 22% of worldwide water is used in industry.
Major industrial users include hydroelectric dams, thermoelectric power plants, which use water for cooling, ore and oil refineries, which use water in chemical processes, and manufacturing plants, which use water as a solvent.
Water withdrawal can be very high for certain industries, but consumption is generally much lower than that of agriculture.
Water is used in renewable power generation.
Hydroelectric power derives energy from the force of water flowing downhill, driving a turbine connected to a generator.
This hydroelectricity is a low-cost, non-polluting, renewable energy source.
Significantly, hydroelectric power can also be used for load following unlike most renewable energy sources which are intermittent.
Ultimately, the energy in a hydroelectric power plant is supplied by the sun.
Heat from the sun evaporates water, which condenses as rain in higher altitudes and flows downhill.
Pumped-storage hydroelectric plants also exist, which use grid electricity to pump water uphill when demand is low, and use the stored water to produce electricity when demand is high.
Thermoelectric power plants using cooling towers have high consumption, nearly equal to their withdrawal, as most of the withdrawn water is evaporated as part of the cooling process.
The withdrawal, however, is lower than in once-through cooling systems.
Water is also used in many large scale industrial processes, such as thermoelectric power production, oil refining, fertilizer production and other chemical plant use, and natural gas extraction from shale rock.
Discharge of untreated water from industrial uses is pollution.
Pollution includes discharged solutes and increased water temperature (thermal pollution).
It is estimated that 8% of worldwide water use is for domestic purposes.
These include drinking water, bathing, cooking, toilet flushing, cleaning, laundry and gardening.
Basic domestic water requirements have been estimated by Peter Gleick at around 50 liters per person per day, excluding water for gardens.
Drinking water is water that is of sufficiently high quality so that it can be consumed or used without risk of immediate or long term harm.
Such water is commonly called potable water.
In most developed countries, the water supplied to domestic, commerce and industry is all of drinking water standard even though only a very small proportion is actually consumed or used in food preparation.
Of those, 159 million people worldwide drink water directly from surface water sources, such as lakes and streams.
One in eight people in the world do not have access to safe water.
Unsafe drinking water leads to 1.
The world's supply of groundwater is steadily decreasing.
Groundwater depletion (or overdrafting) is occurring for example in Asia, South America and North America.
It is still unclear how much natural renewal balances this usage, and whether ecosystems are threatened.
Water resource management is the activity of planning, developing, distributing and managing the optimum use of water resources.
It is an aspect of water cycle management.
The field of water resources management will have to continue to adapt to the current and future issues facing the allocation of water.
With the growing uncertainties of global climate change and the long-term impacts of past management actions, this decision-making will be even more difficult.
It is likely that ongoing climate change will lead to situations that have not been encountered.
As a result, alternative management strategies, including participatory approaches and adaptive capacity are increasingly being used to strengthen water decision-making.
Ideally, water resource management planning has regard to all the competing demands for water and seeks to allocate water on an equitable basis to satisfy all uses and demands.
As with other resource management, this is rarely possible in practice so decision-makers must prioritise issues of sustainability, equity and factor optimisation (in that order!
One of the biggest concerns for water-based resources in the future is the sustainability of the current and future water resource allocation.
Sustainable Development Goal 6 has a target related to water resources management: "Target 6.
At present, only about 0.
And there is ever-increasing demand for drinking, manufacturing, leisure and agriculture.
Due to the small percentage of water available, optimizing the fresh water we have left from natural resources has been a growing challenge around the world.
Much effort in water resource management is directed at optimizing the use of water and in minimizing the environmental impact of water use on the natural environment.
The observation of water as an integral part of the ecosystem is based on integrated water resources management, based on the 1992 Dublin Principles (see below).
Sustainable water management requires a holistic approach based on the principles of Integrated Water Resource Management, originally articulated in 1992 at the Dublin (January) and Rio (July) conferences.
Water has an economic value in all its competing uses and should be recognized as an economic good.
Implementation of these principles has guided reform of national water management law around the world since 1992.
Further challenges to sustainable and equitable water resources management include the fact that many water bodies are shared across boundaries which may be international (see water conflict) or intra-national (see Murray-Darling basin).
Integrated water resources management (IWRM) has been defined by the Global Water Partnership (GWP) as "a process which promotes the coordinated development and management of water, land and related resources, in order to maximize the resultant economic and social welfare in an equitable manner without compromising the sustainability of vital ecosystems".
Some scholars say that IWRM is complementary to water security because water security is a goal or destination, whilst IWRM is the process necessary to achieve that goal.
IWRM is a paradigm that emerged at international conferences in the late 1900s and early 2000s, although participatory water management institutions have existed for centuries.
Discussions on a holistic way of managing water resources began already in the 1950s leading up to the 1977 United Nations Water Conference.
The development of IWRM was particularly recommended in the final statement of the ministers at the International Conference on Water and the Environment in 1992, known as the Dublin Statement.
This concept aims to promote changes in practices which are considered fundamental to improved water resource management.
IWRM was a topic of the second World Water Forum, which was attended by a more varied group of stakeholders than the preceding conferences and contributed to the creation of the GWP.
Social equity: ensuring equal access for all users (particularly marginalized and poorer user groups) to an adequate quantity and quality of water necessary to sustain human well-being.
Economic efficiency: bringing the greatest benefit to the greatest number of users possible with the available financial and water resources.
Ecological sustainability: requiring that aquatic ecosystems are acknowledged as users and that adequate allocation is made to sustain their natural functioning.
In 2002, the development of IWRM was discussed at the World Summit on Sustainable Development held in Johannesburg, which aimed to encourage the implementation of IWRM at a global level.
The third World Water Forum recommended IWRM and discussed information sharing, stakeholder participation, and gender and class dynamics.
Operationally, IWRM approaches involve applying knowledge from various disciplines as well as the insights from diverse stakeholders to devise and implement efficient, equitable and sustainable solutions to water and development problems.
As such, IWRM is a comprehensive, participatory planning and implementation tool for managing and developing water resources in a way that balances social and economic needs, and that ensures the protection of ecosystems for future generations.
In addition, in light of contributing the achievement of Sustainable Development goals (SDGs), IWRM has been evolving into more sustainable approach as it considers the Nexus approach, which is a cross-sectoral water resource management.
The Nexus approach is based on the recognition that "water, energy and food are closely linked through global and local water, carbon and energy cycles or chains.
An IWRM approach aims at avoiding a fragmented approach of water resources management by considering the following aspects: Enabling environment, roles of Institutions, management Instruments.
Some of the cross-cutting conditions that are also important to consider when implementing IWRM are: Political will and commitment, capacity development, adequate investment, financial stability and sustainable cost recovery, monitoring and evaluation.
There is not one correct administrative model.
The art of IWRM lies in selecting, adjusting and applying the right mix of these tools for a given situation.
IWRM practices depend on context; at the operational level, the challenge is to translate the agreed principles into concrete action.
Water resource management and governance is handled differently by different countries.
For example, in the United States, the United States Geological Survey (USGS) and its partners monitor water resources, conduct research and inform the public about groundwater quality.
Irrigation is the practice of applying controlled amounts of water to land to help grow crops, landscape plants, and lawns.
Irrigation has been a key aspect of agriculture for over 5,000 years and has been developed by many cultures worldwide.
Irrigation helps to grow crops, maintain landscapes, and revegetate disturbed soils in dry areas and during times of below-average rainfall.
In addition to these uses, irrigation is also employed to protect crops from frost, suppress weed growth in grain fields, and prevent soil consolidation.
It is also used to cool livestock, reduce dust, dispose of sewage, and support mining operations.
Drainage, which involves the removal of surface and sub-surface water from a given location, is often studied in conjunction with irrigation.
Several irrigation methods differ in how water is supplied to plants.
Surface irrigation, also known as gravity irrigation, is the oldest form of irrigation and has been in use for thousands of years.
In sprinkler irrigation, water is piped to one or more central locations within the field and distributed by overhead high-pressure water devices.
Micro-irrigation is a system that distributes water under low pressure through a piped network and applies it as a small discharge to each plant.
Micro-irrigation uses less pressure and water flow than sprinkler irrigation.
Drip irrigation delivers water directly to the root zone of plants.
Subirrigation has been used in field crops in areas with high water tables for many years.
It involves artificially raising the water table to moisten the soil below the root zone of plants.
Irrigation water can come from groundwater (extracted from springs or by using wells), from surface water (withdrawn from rivers, lakes or reservoirs) or from non-conventional sources like treated wastewater, desalinated water, drainage water, or fog collection.
Irrigation can be supplementary to rainfall, which is common in many parts of the world as rainfed agriculture, or it can be full irrigation, where crops rarely rely on any contribution from rainfall.
Full irrigation is less common and occurs only in arid landscapes with very low rainfall or when crops are grown in semi-arid areas outside the rainy season.
The environmental effects of irrigation relate to the changes in quantity and quality of soil and water as a result of irrigation and the subsequent effects on natural and social conditions in river basins and downstream of an irrigation scheme.
The effects stem from altered hydrological conditions resulting from the installation and operation of the irrigation scheme.
Amongst these problems is the depletion of underground aquifers through overdrafting.
Soil can be over-irrigated due to poor distribution uniformity or management wastes water, chemicals, and may lead to water pollution.
Over-irrigation can cause deep drainage from rising water tables, which can lead to irrigation salinity problems, requiring watertable control through some form of subsurface land drainage.
The world’s total irrigated land area more than doubled between 1964 and 2023 and by 2023, 23% of all croplands were equipped for irrigation.
In 2025 irrigated croplands produce 48% of all crops in value terms, indicating that irrigated land is 3.
On average, the yield of irrigated land is 76% higher than that of rain fed land.
The global land area equipped for irrigation reached 355 million ha in 2023, an increase of 23% from the 289 million ha of 2000 and more than twice the land area equipped for irrigation in the1960s.
The vast majority is located in Asia (71% in 2023), where irrigation was a key component of the green revolution; the Americas account for 16% and Europe for 8% of the world total.
India (76 million ha) and China (75 million ha) have the largest equipped area for irrigation, far ahead of the United States of America (25 million ha).
China and India also have the largest net gains in equipped area between 2000 and 2023 (+21 million ha for China and +15 million ha for India).
In 2000, the total fertile land was 2,788,000 km2 (689 million acres), and it was equipped with irrigation infrastructure worldwide.
Roughly 68% of this area is in Asia, 17% in the Americas, 9% in Europe, 5% in Africa, and 1% in Oceania.
The largest contiguous areas of high irrigation density are found in Northern and Eastern India and Pakistan along the Ganges and Indus rivers; in the Hai He, Huang He, and Yangtze basins in China; along the Nile river in Egypt and Sudan; and in the Mississippi-Missouri river basin, the Southern Great Plains, and in parts of California in the United States.
Smaller irrigation areas are spread across almost all populated parts of the world.
By 2012, the area of irrigated land had increased to an estimated total of 3,242,917 km2 (801 million acres), which is nearly the size of India.
The irrigation of 20% of farming land accounts for the production of 40% of food production.
The scale of irrigation increased dramatically over the 20th century.
In 1800, 8 million hectares globally were irrigated; in 1950, 94 million; and in 1990, 235 million.
By 1990, 30% of the global food production came from irrigated land.
Irrigation techniques across the globe include canals redirecting surface water, groundwater pumping, and diverting water from dams.
National governments lead most irrigation schemes within their borders, but private investors and other nations, especially the United States, China, and European countries like the United Kingdom, also fund and organize some schemes within other nations.
By 2021, the global land area equipped for irrigation reached 352 million ha, an increase of 22% from the 289 million ha in 2000 and more than twice the land area equipped for irrigation in the 1960s.
The vast majority is located in Asia (70%), where irrigation was a key component of the green revolution; the Americas account for 16%, and Europe for 8% of the world total.
India (76 million ha) and China (75 million ha) have the largest irrigated area, far ahead of the United States of America (27 million ha).
China and India also had the largest net gains in equipped area between 2000 and 2020 (+21 million ha in China and +15 million ha in India).
All regions saw increases in irrigated area, with Africa growing the fastest (+29%), followed by Asia (+25%), Oceania (+24%), the Americas (+19%), and Europe (+2%).
Irrigation enables the production of more crops, especially commodity crops in areas that otherwise could not support them.
Countries frequently invested in irrigation to increase wheat, rice, or cotton production, often with the overarching goal of increasing self-sufficiency.
Irrigation water can come from groundwater (extracted from springs or by using wells), from surface water (withdrawn from rivers, lakes or reservoirs) or from non-conventional sources like treated wastewater, desalinated water, drainage water, or fog collection.
While floodwater harvesting is an accepted irrigation method, rainwater harvesting is usually not considered a form of irrigation.
Rainwater harvesting is the collection of runoff water from roofs or unused land and its concentration.
Irrigation water can also come from non-conventional sources like treated wastewater, desalinated water, drainage water, or fog collection.
In countries where humid air sweeps through at night, water can be obtained by condensation onto cold surfaces.
This is practiced in the vineyards at Lanzarote using stones to condense water.
Fog collectors are also made of canvas or foil sheets.
Using condensate from air conditioning units as a water source is also becoming more popular in large urban areas.
As of November 2019, a Glasgow-based startup has helped a farmer in Scotland to establish edible salt marsh crops irrigated with seawater.
An acre of previously marginal land has been put under cultivation to grow samphire, sea blite, and sea aster; these plants yield a higher profit than potatoes.
The land is flood irrigated twice a day to simulate tidal flooding; the water is pumped from the sea using wind power.
Additional benefits are soil remediation and carbon sequestration.
Until the 1960s, there were fewer than half as many people on the planet as there are in 2024.
People were not as wealthy as today, consumed fewer calories and ate less meat, so less water was needed to produce their food.
They required a third of the volume of water humans presently take from rivers.
Today, the competition for water resources is much more intense, because there are now more than seven billion people on the planet, increasing the likelihood of overconsumption of food produced by water-thirsty animal agriculture and intensive farming practices.
This creates increasing competition for water from industry, urbanisation, and biofuel crops.
Farmers will have to strive to increase productivity to meet growing demands for food, while industry and cities find ways to use water more efficiently.
Successful agriculture depends on farmers having adequate access to water.
However, water scarcity is already a critical constraint to farming in many parts of the world.
There are several methods of irrigation.
They vary in how the water is supplied to the plants.
The goal is to apply the water to the plants as uniformly as possible, so that each plant has the amount of water it needs, neither too much nor too little.
Irrigation can also be understood whether it is supplementary to rainfall, as happens in many parts of the world, or whether it is 'full irrigation, whereby crops rarely depend on any contribution from rainfall.
Full irrigation is less common and occurs only in arid landscapes with very low rainfall or when crops are grown in semi-arid areas outside rainy seasons.
Surface irrigation, also known as gravity irrigation, is the oldest form of irrigation and has been in use for thousands of years.
In surface (furrow, flood, or level basin) irrigation systems, water moves across the surface of agricultural lands to wet it and infiltrate into the soil.
Water moves by following gravity or the slope of the land.
Surface irrigation can be subdivided into furrow, border strip, or basin irrigation.
It is often called flood irrigation when irrigation results in flooding or near-flooding of the cultivated land.
Historically, surface irrigation has been the most common method for irrigating agricultural land in most parts of the world.
The water application efficiency of surface irrigation is typically lower than that of other irrigation methods, due in part to limited control over applied depths.
Surface irrigation involves significantly lower capital costs and energy requirements than pressurized irrigation systems.
Hence, it is often the irrigation choice for developing nations, for low-value crops, and for large fields.
Where water levels from the irrigation source permit, they are controlled by dikes (levees), usually plugged with soil.
This is often seen in terraced rice fields (rice paddies), where the method is used to flood or control water levels in each distinct field.
In some cases, the water is pumped or lifted by human or animal power to the level of the land.
Surface irrigation is even used to water urban gardens in certain areas, for example, in and around Phoenix, Arizona.
The irrigated area is surrounded by a berm and the water is delivered according to a schedule set by a local irrigation district.
A special form of irrigation using surface water is spate irrigation, also called floodwater harvesting.
In the event of a flood (spate), water is diverted into normally dry river beds (wadis) via a network of dams, gates, and channels and spread over large areas.
The moisture stored in the soil will be used to grow crops thereafter.
Spate irrigation areas are particularly located in semi-arid or arid mountainous regions.
Micro-irrigation, sometimes called localized irrigation, low volume irrigation, or trickle irrigation, is a system where water is distributed under low pressure through a piped network, in a pre-determined pattern, and applied as a small discharge to each plant or adjacent to it.
Traditional drip irrigation uses individual emitters, subsurface drip irrigation (SDI), micro-spray or micro-sprinklers, and mini-bubbler irrigation, all of which belong to this category of irrigation methods.
Drip irrigation, also known as microirrigation or trickle irrigation, functions as its name suggests.
In this system, water is delivered at or near the root zone of plants, one drop at a time.
This method can be the most water-efficient method of irrigation, if managed properly; evaporation and runoff are minimized.
The field water efficiency of drip irrigation is typically in the range of 80 to 90% when managed correctly.
In modern agriculture, drip irrigation is often combined with plastic mulch, further reducing evaporation, and is also the means of delivery of fertilizer.
The process is known as fertigation.
Deep percolation, where water moves below the root zone, can occur if a drip system is operated for too long or if the delivery rate is too high.
Drip irrigation methods range from very high-tech and computerized to low-tech and labour-intensive.
Lower water pressures are usually needed than for most other types of systems, except for low-energy center pivot systems and surface irrigation systems.
The system can be designed for uniformity throughout a field or for precise water delivery to individual plants in a landscape containing a mix of plant species.
Although it is difficult to regulate pressure on steep slopes, pressure-compensating emitters are available, so the field does not need to be level.
High-tech solutions involve precisely calibrated emitters positioned along lines of tubing extending from a computerized set of valves.
In sprinkler or overhead irrigation, water is piped to one or more central locations within the field and distributed by overhead high-pressure sprinklers or guns.
A system using sprinklers, sprays, or guns mounted overhead on permanently installed risers is often referred to as a solid-set irrigation system.
Higher-pressure sprinklers that rotate are called rotors and are driven by a ball drive, gear drive, or impact mechanism.
Rotors can be designed to rotate in a full or partial circle.
Guns are similar to rotors, except that they generally operate at very high pressures of 275 to 900 kPa (39.
Guns are used not only for irrigation, but also for industrial applications such as dust suppression and logging.
Sprinklers can also be mounted on moving platforms connected to the water source by a hose.
Automatically moving wheeled systems known as traveling sprinklers may irrigate areas such as small farms, sports fields, parks, pastures, and cemeteries unattended.
Most of these use a length of polyethylene tubing wound on a steel drum.
As the tubing is wound onto the drum, powered by irrigation water or a small gas engine, the sprinkler is pulled across the field.
When the sprinkler returns to the reel, the system shuts off.
This type of system is known to most people as a "water reel" travelling irrigation sprinkler, and it is used extensively for dust suppression, irrigation, and the land application of wastewater.
Other travellers use a flat rubber hose dragged along behind them, while a cable pulls the sprinkler platform.
Center pivot irrigation is a form of sprinkler irrigation utilising several segments of pipe (usually galvanized steel or aluminium) joined and supported by trusses, mounted on wheeled towers with sprinklers positioned along its length.
The system moves in a circular pattern and is fed with water from the pivot point at the center of the arc.
These systems are found and used in all parts of the world and allow irrigation of all types of terrain.
Newer systems have drop sprinkler heads.
As of 2017, most center pivot systems have drops hanging from a U-shaped pipe attached at the top of the pipe with sprinkler heads that are positioned a few feet (at most) above the crop, thus limiting evaporative losses.
Drops can also be used with drag hoses or bubblers that deposit the water directly on the ground between crops.
Crops are often planted in a circle to conform to the center pivot.
This type of system is known as LEPA (Low Energy Precision Application).
Originally, most center pivots were water-powered.
These were replaced by hydraulic systems (T-L Irrigation) and electric-motor-driven systems (Reinke, Valley, Zimmatic).
Many modern pivots feature GPS devices.
A series of pipes, each with a wheel of about 1.
Water is supplied at one end using a large hose.
After sufficient irrigation has been applied to one strip of the field, the hose is removed, the water drained from the system, and the assembly rolled either by hand or with a purpose-built mechanism to move the sprinklers to a different position across the field.
The hose is reconnected.
The process is repeated in a pattern until the whole field has been irrigated.
This system is less expensive to install than a center pivot, but much more labor-intensive to operate – it does not travel automatically across the field: it applies water in a stationary strip, must be drained, and then rolled to a new strip.
Most systems use 100 or 130 mm (3.
The pipe doubles as both a water transport and an axle for rotating all the wheels.
A drive system (often located near the centre of the wheel line) rotates the clamped-together pipe sections as a single axle, thereby rolling the entire wheel line.
Manual adjustment of individual wheel positions may be necessary if the system becomes misaligned.
Wheel line systems are limited in the amount of water they can carry and limited in the height of crops that can be irrigated.
One useful feature of a lateral move system is that it consists of sections that can be easily disconnected, allowing it to adapt to the field shape as the line is moved.
They are most often used for small, rectilinear, or oddly-shaped fields, hilly or mountainous regions, or in regions where labor is inexpensive.
Subirrigation has been used for many years in field crops in areas with high water tables.
It is a method of artificially raising the water table to allow the soil to be moistened from below the plants' root zone.
Often, those systems are located on permanent grasslands in lowlands or river valleys and combined with drainage infrastructure.
A system of pumping stations, canals, weirs, and gates allows it to raise or lower the water level in a network of ditches, thereby controlling the water table.
Subirrigation is also used in the commercial greenhouse production, usually for potted plants.
Water is delivered from below, absorbed upwards, and the excess is collected for recycling.
Typically, a solution of water and nutrients floods a container or flows through a trough for a short period (10–20 minutes) and is then pumped back into a holding tank for reuse.
Sub-irrigation in greenhouses requires fairly sophisticated, expensive equipment and management.
Advantages are water and nutrient conservation, and labor savings through reduced system maintenance and automation.
It is similar in principle and action to subsurface basin irrigation.
Another type of subirrigation is the self-watering container, also known as a sub-irrigated planter.
This consists of a planter suspended over a reservoir with a wicking material, such as a polyester rope.
The water is drawn up the wick through capillary action.
A similar technique is the wicking bed; this too uses capillary action.
Modern irrigation methods are efficient enough to supply the entire field uniformly with water, ensuring each plant receives the amount it needs, neither too much nor too little.
Increased irrigation efficiency has several positive outcomes for the farmer, the community, and the wider environment.
Low application efficiency indicates that the amount of water applied to the field exceeds the crop or field requirements.
Increasing the application efficiency means that the amount of crop produced per unit of water increases.
Improved efficiency may be achieved by applying less water to an existing field or by using water more wisely, thereby achieving higher yields in the same area of land.
In some parts of the world, farmers are charged for irrigation water; hence, over-application has a direct financial cost to the farmer.
Irrigation often requires pumping energy (electricity or fossil fuels) to deliver water to the field or to supply the required operating pressure.
Hence, increased efficiency will reduce both water and energy costs per unit of agricultural production.
A reduction in water use on one field may allow the farmer to irrigate a larger area of land, increasing total agricultural production.
Low efficiency usually means that excess water is lost through seepage or runoff, both of which can result in loss of crop nutrients or pesticides with potential adverse impacts on the surrounding environment.
Improving the efficiency of irrigation is usually achieved in one of two ways: either by improving the system design or by optimizing the irrigation management.
Improving system design includes converting from one form of irrigation to another (e.
Irrigation management refers to the scheduling of irrigation events and decisions about how much water to apply.
Domestic gardens and landscaped areas around public buildings are often equipped with some form of irrigation in dry climates.
In Australia, small garden sprinklers attached to a hose became a common form of irrigation, often regulated by a timer.
In the 1960s, Hugall & Hoile, a small company in Perth, Western Australia, invented a system which they called "reticulation", by which a garden's irrigation system was divided into segments, with solenoids (electronic valves) connected to a mechanical timer.
The system became highly popular, and within 20 years, around half of all homes in Perth had automated sprinkler systems.
Robert Hugall made a name for himself as "the father of backyard irrigation", while former Australian cricketer Wally Edwards (who founded Holman Industries in 1966) later targeted the DIY market in garden watering systems in the early 1990s; both men grew rich from their companies.
As climate change is causing hotter, drier weather on both sides of the continent, newer drip irrigation systems that use less water have been developed.
In addition, desalination plants have been built or recommissioned in Perth, Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, and Brisbane, to meet the growing need for more water to keep plants and, especially, the tree canopy, growing.
Negative impacts frequently accompany extensive irrigation.
Some projects that diverted surface water for irrigation dried up the water sources, which led to a more extreme regional climate.
Projects that relied on groundwater and pumped too much from underground aquifers created subsidence and salinization.
Salinization of irrigation water, in turn, damaged the crops and seeped into drinking water.
Pests and pathogens also thrived in the irrigation canals or ponds full of still water, which created regional outbreaks of diseases like malaria and schistosomiasis.
Governments also used irrigation schemes to encourage migration, especially of more desirable populations into an area.
Additionally, some of these large nationwide schemes failed to pay off at all, costing more than any benefit gained from increased crop yields.
Overdrafting (depletion) of underground aquifers: In the mid-20th century, the advent of diesel and electric motors led to systems that could pump groundwater out of major aquifers faster than drainage basins could refill them.
This can lead to permanent loss of aquifer capacity, decreased water quality, ground subsidence, and other problems.
The future of food production in such areas as the North China Plain, the Punjab region in India and Pakistan, and the Great Plains of the US is threatened by this phenomenon.
Irrigation schemes involve addressing numerous engineering and economic challenges while minimizing adverse environmental impacts.
Ground subsidence (e.
Underirrigation or irrigation giving only just enough water for the plant (e.
This requires either leaching to remove these salts and a method of drainage to carry the salts away.
When using drip lines, leaching is best done at regular intervals (with only a slight excess of water) so that the salt is flushed back under the plant's roots.
Overirrigation because of poor distribution uniformity or management wastes water, chemicals, and may lead to water pollution.
Deep drainage (from over-irrigation) may result in rising water tables, which in some instances will lead to problems of irrigation salinity requiring watertable control by some form of subsurface land drainage.
For example, in Australia, over-abstraction of fresh water for intensive irrigation activities has caused 33% of the land area to be at risk of salination.
Drainage front instability, also known as viscous fingering, where an unstable drainage front results in a pattern of fingers and viscous entrapped saturated zones.
Irrigation with saline or high-sodium water may damage soil structure owing to the formation of alkaline soil.
Clogging of filters: algae can clog filters, drip installations, and nozzles.
Chlorination, algaecide, UV, and ultrasonic methods can be used for algae control in irrigation systems.
Complications in accurately measuring irrigation performance, which changes over time and space, using measures such as productivity, efficiency, equity, and adequacy.
Macro-irrigation, typical in intensive agriculture, where also are used agrochemicals, often causes eutrophication.
Assisting smallholders in sustainably and collectively managing irrigation technology and changes in technology.
Archaeological investigations have found evidence of irrigation in areas lacking sufficient natural rainfall to support rainfed agriculture.
Some of the earliest known use of the technology dates to the 6th millennium BCE in Khuzistan in the south-west of Iran.
The site of Choga Mami, in present-day Iraq on the border with Iran, is believed to be the earliest to show the first canal irrigation in operation at about 6000 BCE.
Irrigation was used to manipulate water in the alluvial plains of the Indus Valley Civilization, with its application estimated to have begun around 4500 BCE and to have drastically increased the size and prosperity of their agricultural settlements.
The Indus Valley Civilization developed sophisticated irrigation and water-storage systems, including artificial reservoirs at Girnar dated to 3000 BCE, and an early canal irrigation system from c.
Large-scale agriculture was practiced, with an extensive network of canals used for irrigation.
Farmers in the Mesopotamian plain used irrigation from at least the third millennium BCE.
They developed perennial irrigation, regularly watering crops throughout the growing season by coaxing water through a matrix of small channels formed in the field.
Ancient Egyptians practiced basin irrigation using the flooding of the Nile to inundate land plots which had been surrounded by dikes.
The flood water remained until the fertile sediment had settled before the engineers returned the surplus to the watercourse.
There is evidence of the ancient Egyptian pharaoh Amenemhet III in the twelfth dynasty (about 1800 BCE) using the natural lake of the Faiyum Oasis as a reservoir to store surpluses of water for use during dry seasons.
The lake swelled annually from the flooding of the Nile.
The Ancient Nubians developed a form of irrigation by using a waterwheel-like device called a sakia.
Irrigation began in Nubia between the third and second millennia BCE.
It largely depended upon the flood waters that would flow through the Nile River and other rivers in what is now the Sudan.
In sub-Saharan Africa, irrigation reached the Niger River region cultures and civilizations by the first or second millennium BCE and was based on wet-season flooding and water harvesting.
Evidence of terrace irrigation occurs in pre-Columbian America, early Syria, India, and China.
In the Zana Valley of the Andes Mountains in Peru, archaeologists have found remains of three irrigation canals radiocarbon-dated from the 4th millennium BCE, the 3rd millennium BCE and the 9th century CE.
These canals provide the earliest record of irrigation in the New World.
Traces of a canal possibly dating from the 5th millennium BCE were found under the 4th-millennium canal.
Ancient Persia (modern-day Iran) used irrigation as early as the 6th millennium BCE to grow barley in areas with insufficient rainfall.
The Qanats, developed in ancient Persia about 800 BCE, are among the oldest known irrigation methods still in use today.
They are now found in Asia, the Middle East, and North Africa.
The system comprises a network of vertical wells and gently sloping tunnels driven into the sides of cliffs and steep hills to tap groundwater.
The noria, a water wheel with clay pots around the rim powered by the flow of the stream (or by animals where the water source was still), first came into use at about this time among Roman settlers in North Africa.
By 150 BCE, the pots were fitted with valves to allow smoother filling as they were forced underwater.
The irrigation works of ancient Sri Lanka, the earliest dating from about 300 BCE in the reign of King Pandukabhaya, and under continuous development for the next thousand years, were one of the most complex irrigation systems of the ancient world.
They included underground canals and artificial reservoirs to store water.
These reservoirs and canal systems were used primarily to irrigate paddy fields, which require a lot of water to cultivate.
Most of these irrigation systems still exist undamaged to this day in Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa, thanks to their advanced and precise engineering.
The system was extensively restored and further extended during the reign of King Parakrama Bahu (1153–1186 CE).
The oldest known hydraulic engineers of China were Sunshu Ao (6th century BCE) of the Spring and Autumn period and Ximen Bao (5th century BCE) of the Warring States period, both of whom worked on large irrigation projects.
In the Sichuan region belonging to the state of Qin of ancient China, the Dujiangyan Irrigation System devised by the Qin Chinese hydrologist and irrigation engineer Li Bing was built in 256 BCE to irrigate a vast area of farmland that today still supplies water.
By the 2nd century CE, during the Han dynasty, the Chinese also used chain pumps which lifted water from a lower elevation to a higher one.
These were powered by manual foot-pedal, hydraulic waterwheels, or rotating mechanical wheels pulled by oxen.
The water was used for public works, providing water for urban residential quarters and palace gardens, but mostly for irrigation of farmland canals and channels in the fields.
Korea, Chang Yŏngsil, also known as Jang Yeong-sil, a Korean engineer of the Joseon dynasty, under the active direction of the king, Sejong the Great, invented the world's first rain gauge, uryanggye (Korean: 우량계) in 1441.
It was installed in irrigation tanks as part of a nationwide system to measure and collect rainfall for agricultural applications.
Planners and farmers could better use the information gathered in the survey with this instrument.
The earliest agricultural irrigation canal system known in the area of the present-day United States dates to between 1200 BCE and 800 BCE and was discovered by Desert Archaeology, Inc.
The irrigation-canal system predates the Hohokam culture by two thousand years and belongs to an unidentified culture.
In North America, the Hohokam were the only culture known to rely on irrigation canals to water their crops, and their irrigation systems supported the largest population in the Southwest by CE 1300.
The Hohokam constructed simple canals, combined with weirs, for their agricultural pursuits.
Between the 7th and 14th centuries, they built and maintained extensive irrigation networks along the lower Salt and middle Gila Rivers that rivaled the complexity of those used in the ancient Near East, Egypt, and China.
These were constructed using relatively simple excavation tools, without the benefit of advanced engineering technologies, and achieved drops of a few feet per mile, balancing erosion and siltation.
The Hohokam cultivated cotton, tobacco, maize, beans, and squash varieties and harvested an assortment of wild plants.
Late in the Hohokam Chronological Sequence, they used extensive dry-farming systems, primarily to grow agave for food and fiber.
Their reliance on agricultural strategies based on canal irrigation, vital in their less-than-hospitable desert environment and arid climate, provided the basis for the aggregation of rural populations into stable urban centers.
The oldest known irrigation canals in the Americas are in the desert of northern Peru in the Zaña Valley near the hamlet of Nanchoc.
The canals have been radiocarbon dated to at least 3400 BCE and possibly as old as 4700 BCE.
The canals at that time irrigated crops such as peanuts, squash, manioc, chenopods, a relative of Quinoa, and later maize.
The scale of global irrigation increased dramatically over the 20th century.
In 1800, 8 million hectares were irrigated; in 1950, 94 million hectares, and in 1990, 235 million hectares.
By 1990, 30% of the global food production came from irrigated land.
Irrigation techniques across the globe include canals redirecting surface water, groundwater pumping, and diverting water from dams.
National governments led most irrigation schemes within their borders, but private investors and other nations, especially the United States, China, and European countries like the United Kingdom, funded and organized some schemes within other nations.
Irrigation enabled the production of more crops, especially commodity crops in areas that otherwise could not support them.
Countries frequently invested in irrigation to increase wheat, rice, or cotton production, often with the overarching goal of increasing self-sufficiency.
In the 20th century, global anxiety, specifically about the American cotton monopoly, fueled many empirical irrigation projects: Britain began developing irrigation in India, the Ottomans in Egypt, the French in Algeria, the Portuguese in Angola, the Germans in Togo, and Soviets in Central Asia.
Negative impacts frequently accompany extensive irrigation.
Some projects that diverted surface water for irrigation dried up water sources, leading to a more extreme regional climate.
Projects that relied on groundwater and pumped too much from underground aquifers created subsidence and salinization.
Salinization of irrigation water damaged the crops and seeped into drinking water.
Pests and pathogens also thrived in the irrigation canals or ponds full of still water, which created regional outbreaks of diseases like malaria and schistosomiasis.
Governments also used irrigation schemes to encourage migration, especially of more desirable populations into an area.
Additionally, some of these large nationwide schemes failed to pay off at all, costing more than any benefit gained from increased crop yields.
Irrigated land in the United States increased from 300,000 acres in 1880 to 4.
Two thirds of this irrigation sources from groundwater or small ponds and reservoirs, while the other one third comes from large dams.
One of the main attractions of irrigation in the West was its increased dependability compared to rainfall-watered agriculture in the East.
Proponents argued that farmers with a dependable water supply could more easily get loans from bankers interested in this more predictable farming model.
Most irrigation in the Great Plains region derived from underground aquifers.
Euro-American farmers who colonized the region in the 19th century tried to grow the commodity crops they were used to, such as wheat, corn, and alfalfa, but rainfall limited their yields.
Between the late 1800s and the 1930s, farmers used wind-powered pumps to draw groundwater.
These windpumps had limited power, but the development of gas-powered pumps in the mid-1930s pushed wells deep into the Ogallala Aquifer.
Farmers irrigated fields by laying pipes across the field with sprinklers at intervals, a labor-intensive process, until the advent of the center-pivot sprinkler after World War II, which made irrigation significantly easier.
By the 1970s, farmers drained the aquifer ten times faster than it could recharge, and by 1993, they had removed half of the accessible water.
Large-scale federal funding and intervention pushed through the majority of irrigation projects in the West, especially in California, Colorado, Arizona, and Nevada.
At first, plans to increase irrigated farmland, largely by giving land to farmers and asking them to find water, failed across the board.
Congress passed the Desert Land Act in 1877 and the Carey Act in 1894, which only marginally increased irrigation.
Only in 1902 did Congress pass the National Reclamation Act, which channeled money from the sale of western public lands, in parcels up to 160 acres large, into irrigation projects on public or private land in the arid West.
The Congressmen who passed the law and their wealthy supporters supported Western irrigation because it would increase American exports, 'reclaim' the West, and push the Eastern poor out West for a better life.
While the National Reclamation Act was the most successful piece of federal irrigation legislation, its implementation did not go as planned.
The Reclamation Service chose to push most of the Act's money toward construction rather than settlement, so the Service overwhelmingly prioritized building large dams like the Hoover Dam.
Over the 20th century, Congress and state governments grew more frustrated with the Reclamation Service and the irrigation schemes.
Frederick Newell, head of the Reclamation Service, proving uncompromising and challenging to work with, falling crop prices, resistance to delay debt payments, and refusal to begin new projects until the completion of old ones all contributed.
The Reclamation Extension Act of 1914, transferring a significant amount of irrigation decision-making power regarding irrigation projects from the Reclamation Service to Congress, was in many ways a result of increasing political unpopularity of the Reclamation Service.
In the lower Colorado Basin of Arizona, Colorado, and Nevada, the states derive irrigation water largely from rivers, especially the Colorado River, which irrigates more than 4.
In the 1952 case Arizona v.
California, Arizona sued California for increased access to the Colorado River, under the grounds that their groundwater supply could not sustain their almost entirely irrigation-based agricultural economy, which they won.
California, which began irrigating in earnest in the 1870s in San Joaquin Valley, had passed the Wright Act of 1887 permitting agricultural communities to construct and operate needed irrigation works.
The Colorado River also irrigates large fields in California's Imperial Valley, fed by the National Reclamation Act-built All-American Canal.
When the Bolsheviks conquered Central Asia in 1917, the native Kazakhs, Uzbeks, and Turkmens used minimal irrigation.
The Slavic immigrants pushed into the area by the Tsarist government brought their irrigation methods, including waterwheels, the use of rice paddies to restore salted land, and underground irrigation channels.
Russians dismissed these techniques as crude and inefficient.
Despite this, tsarist officials maintained these systems through the late 19th century without other solutions.
Before conquering the area, the Russian government accepted a 1911 American proposal to send hydraulic experts to Central Asia to investigate the potential for large-scale irrigation.
A 1918 decree by Lenin then encouraged irrigation development in the region, which began in the 1930s.
When it did, Stalin and other Soviet leaders prioritized large-scale, ambitious hydraulic projects, especially along the Volga River.
The Soviet irrigation push stemmed mainly from their late 19th century fears of the American cotton monopoly and subsequent desire to achieve cotton self-sufficiency.
They had built up their textile manufacturing industry in the 19th century, requiring increased cotton and irrigation, as the region did not receive enough rainfall to support cotton farming.
The Russians built dams on the Don and Kuban Rivers for irrigation, removing freshwater flow from the Sea of Azov and making it much saltier.
Depletion and salinization scourged other areas of the Russian irrigation project.
In the 1950s, Soviet officials began also diverting the Syr Darya and the Amu Darya, which fed the Aral Sea.
Before diversion, the rivers delivered 55 cubic kilometres (13 cu mi) of water to the Aral Sea per year, but after diversion, they delivered only 6 cubic kilometres (1.
Because of its reduced inflow, the Aral Sea covered less than half of its original seabed, which made the regional climate more extreme and created airborne salinization, lowering nearby crop yields.
By 1975, the USSR used eight times as much water as it had in 1913, mostly for irrigation.
Russia's expansion of irrigation began to decline in the late 1980s, and irrigated hectares in Central Asia peaked at 7 million.
Mikhail Gorbachev killed a proposed plan to reverse the Ob and Yenisei for irrigation in 1986, and the breakup of the USSR in 1991 ended Russian investment in Central Asian cotton irrigation.
Various irrigation schemes with different goals and success rates were implemented across Africa in the 20th century, but were all influenced by colonial forces.
The Tana River Irrigation Scheme in eastern Kenya, completed between 1948 and 1963, opened up new lands for agriculture.
The Kenyan government attempted to resettle the area with detainees from the Mau Mau uprising.
Italian oil drillers discovered Libya's underground water resources during the Italian colonization of Libya.
This water lay dormant until 1969, when Muammar al-Gaddafi and American Armand Hammer built the Great Man-Made River to deliver the Saharan water to the coast.
The water largely contributed to irrigation but cost four to ten times more than the crops it produced were worth.
In 1912, the Union of South Africa established an irrigation department and began investing in water storage infrastructure and irrigation systems.
The government used irrigation and dam-building to further social goals such as poverty relief by creating construction jobs for poor whites and by developing irrigation schemes to increase white farming.
One of their first significant irrigation projects was the Hartbeespoort Dam, begun in 1916 to elevate the living conditions of the 'poor whites' in the region and eventually completed as a 'whites only' employment opportunity.
The Pretoria irrigation scheme, Kammanassie project, and Buchuberg irrigation scheme on the Orange River all followed in the same vein in the 1920s and 30s.
In Egypt, modern irrigation began with Muhammad Ali Pasha in the mid-1800s, who sought to achieve Egyptian independence from the Ottomans through increased trade with Europe—specifically cotton exportation.
His administration proposed replacing the traditional Nile basin irrigation, which took advantage of the annual ebb and flow of the Nile, with irrigation barrages in the lower Nile, which better suited cotton production.
Egypt devoted 105,000 ha to cotton in 1861, a figure that increased fivefold by 1865.
Most of their exports were shipped to England, and the United States Civil War-induced cotton scarcity in the 1860s cemented Egypt as England's cotton producer.
As the Egyptian economy became more dependent on cotton in the 20th century, controlling even small Nile floods became more important.
Cotton production was more at risk of destruction than more common crops like barley or wheat.
After the British occupation of Egypt in 1882, the British intensified the conversion to perennial irrigation with the construction of the Delta Barrage, the Assiut Barrage, and the first Aswan Dam.
Perennial irrigation decreased local control over water and made traditional subsistence farming or the farming of other crops incredibly difficult, eventually contributing to widespread peasant bankruptcy and the 1879-1882 'Urabi revolt.
See the below template: (Link to a similar template for mobile users.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY 4.
Text taken from The State of the World’s Land and Water Resources for Food and Agriculture 2025​, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY 4.
Text taken from World Food and Agriculture – Statistical Yearbook 2025​, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY-SA IGO 3.
Text taken from World Food and Agriculture – Statistical Yearbook 2023​, FAO, FAO.
Irrigation at the Water Quality Information Center, U.
A pump is a device that moves fluids (liquids or gases), or sometimes slurries, by mechanical action, typically converted from electrical energy into hydraulic or pneumatic energy.
Mechanical pumps serve in a wide range of applications such as pumping water from wells, aquarium filtering, pond filtering and aeration, in the car industry for water-cooling and fuel injection, in the energy industry for pumping oil and natural gas or for operating cooling towers and other components of heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems.
In the medical industry, pumps are used for biochemical processes in developing and manufacturing medicine, and as artificial replacements for body parts, in particular the artificial heart and penile prosthesis.
When a pump contains two or more pump mechanisms with fluid being directed to flow through them in series, it is called a multi-stage pump.
Terms such as two-stage or double-stage may be used to specifically describe the number of stages.
A pump that does not fit this description is simply a single-stage pump in contrast.
In biology, many different types of chemical and biomechanical pumps have evolved; biomimicry is sometimes used in developing new types of mechanical pumps.
Mechanical pumps may be submerged in the fluid they are pumping or be placed external to the fluid.
Pumps can be classified by their method of displacement into electromagnetic pumps, positive-displacement pumps, impulse pumps, velocity pumps, gravity pumps, steam pumps and valveless pumps.
There are three basic types of pumps: positive-displacement, centrifugal and axial-flow pumps.
In centrifugal pumps the direction of flow of the fluid changes by ninety degrees as it flows over an impeller, while in axial flow pumps the direction of flow is unchanged.
Centrifugal pumps are produced by a wide range of manufacturers internationally, and their designs commonly follow global engineering standards such as ISO 2858, ISO 5199, and API 610.
These standards define dimensional interchangeability, mechanical construction, performance tolerances, and material requirements suitable for industrial, agricultural, and municipal applications.
Manufacturers typically publish detailed technical data such as pump curves, efficiency ratings, head-flow characteristics, and impeller geometry to help engineers determine appropriate pump selection for specific operating conditions.
These specifications are essential for ensuring correct pump sizing, energy efficiency, and long-term reliability in fluid-handling systems.
A positive-displacement pump makes a fluid move by trapping a fixed amount and forcing (displacing) that trapped volume into the discharge pipe.
Some positive-displacement pumps use an expanding cavity on the suction side and a decreasing cavity on the discharge side.
Liquid flows into the pump as the cavity on the suction side expands and the liquid flows out of the discharge as the cavity collapses.
The volume is constant through each cycle of operation.
Positive-displacement pumps, unlike centrifugal, can theoretically produce the same flow at a given rotational speed no matter what the discharge pressure.
Thus, positive-displacement pumps are constant flow machines.
However, a slight increase in internal leakage as the pressure increases prevents a truly constant flow rate.
A positive-displacement pump must not operate against a closed valve on the discharge side of the pump, because it has no shutoff head like centrifugal pumps.
A positive-displacement pump operating against a closed discharge valve continues to produce flow and the pressure in the discharge line increases until the line bursts, the pump is severely damaged, or both.
A relief or safety valve on the discharge side of the positive-displacement pump is therefore necessary.
The relief valve can be internal or external.
The pump manufacturer normally has the option to supply internal relief or safety valves.
The internal valve is usually used only as a safety precaution.
An external relief valve in the discharge line, with a return line back to the suction line or supply tank, provides increased safety.
Rotary-type positive displacement: internal and external gear pump, screw pump, lobe pump, shuttle block, flexible vane and sliding vane, circumferential piston, flexible impeller, helical twisted roots (e.
These pumps move fluid using a rotating mechanism that creates a vacuum that captures and draws in the liquid.
Advantages: Rotary pumps are very efficient because they can handle highly viscous fluids with higher flow rates as viscosity increases.
Drawbacks: The nature of the pump requires very close clearances between the rotating pump and the outer edge, making it rotate at a slow, steady speed.
If rotary pumps are operated at high speeds, the fluid may cavitate, which can cause erosion, which eventually causes enlarged clearances that liquid can pass through, which reduces efficiency.
Gear pumps – a simple type of rotary pump where the liquid is pushed around a pair of gears.
Hollow disc pumps (also known as eccentric disc pumps or hollow rotary disc pumps), similar to scroll compressors, these have an eccentric cylindrical rotor encased in a circular housing.
As the rotor orbits, it traps fluid between the rotor and the casing, drawing the fluid through the pump.
It is used for highly viscous fluids like petroleum-derived products, and it can also support high pressures of up to 290 psi.
Peristaltic pumps have rollers which pinch a section of flexible tubing, forcing the liquid ahead as the rollers advance.
Because they are very easy to keep clean, these are popular for dispensing food, medicine, and concrete.
Reciprocating pumps move the fluid using one or more oscillating pistons, plungers, or membranes (diaphragms), while valves restrict fluid motion to the desired direction.
In order for suction to take place, the pump must first pull the plunger in an outward motion to decrease pressure in the chamber.
Once the plunger pushes back, it will increase the chamber pressure and the inward pressure of the plunger will then open the discharge valve and release the fluid into the delivery pipe at constant flow rate and increased pressure.
Pumps in this category range from simplex, with one cylinder, to in some cases quad (four) cylinders, or more.
Many reciprocating-type pumps are duplex (two) or triplex (three) cylinder.
They can be either single-acting with suction during one direction of piston motion and discharge on the other, or double-acting with suction and discharge in both directions.
The pumps can be powered manually, by air or steam, or by a belt driven by an engine.
This type of pump was used extensively in the 19th century—in the early days of steam propulsion—as boiler feed water pumps.
Now reciprocating pumps typically pump highly viscous fluids like concrete and heavy oils, and serve in special applications that demand low flow rates against high resistance.
Reciprocating hand pumps were widely used to pump water from wells.
Common bicycle pumps and foot pumps for inflation use reciprocating action.
These positive-displacement pumps have an expanding cavity on the suction side and a decreasing cavity on the discharge side.
Liquid flows into the pumps as the cavity on the suction side expands and the liquid flows out of the discharge as the cavity collapses.
The volume is constant given each cycle of operation and the pump's volumetric efficiency can be achieved through routine maintenance and inspection of its valves.
Plunger pump – a reciprocating plunger pushes the fluid through one or two open valves, closed by suction on the way back.
Diaphragm pump – similar to plunger pumps, where the plunger pressurizes hydraulic oil which is used to flex a diaphragm in the pumping cylinder.
Diaphragm valves are used to pump hazardous and toxic fluids.
Piston pump displacement pumps – usually simple devices for pumping small amounts of liquid or gel manually.
The common hand soap dispenser is such a pump.
Radial piston pump – a form of hydraulic pump where pistons extend in a radial direction.
Vibratory pump or vibration pump – a particularly low-cost form of plunger pump, popular in low-cost espresso machines.
The only moving part is a spring-loaded piston, the armature of a solenoid.
Driven by half-wave rectified alternating current, the piston is forced forward while energized, and is retracted by the spring during the other half cycle.
Due to their inefficiency, vibratory pumps typically cannot be operated for more than one minute without overheating, so are limited to intermittent duty.
This is the simplest form of rotary positive-displacement pumps.
It consists of two meshed gears that rotate in a closely fitted casing.
The tooth spaces trap fluid and force it around the outer periphery.
The fluid does not travel back on the meshed part, because the teeth mesh closely in the center.
Gear pumps see wide use in car engine oil pumps and in various hydraulic power packs.
A screw pump is a more complicated type of rotary pump that uses two or three screws with opposing thread — e.
The screws are mounted on parallel shafts that often have gears that mesh so the shafts turn together and everything stays in place.
In some cases the driven screw drives the secondary screw, without gears, often using the fluid to limit abrasion.
The screws turn on the shafts and drive fluid through the pump.
As with other forms of rotary pumps, the clearance between moving parts and the pump's casing is minimal.
Widely used for pumping difficult materials, such as sewage sludge contaminated with large particles, a progressing cavity pump consists of a helical rotor, about ten times as long as its width, and a stator, mainly made out of rubber.
This can be visualized as a central core of diameter x with, typically, a curved spiral wound around of thickness half x, though in reality it is manufactured in a single lobe.
This shaft fits inside a heavy-duty rubber sleeve or stator, of wall thickness also typically x.
As the shaft rotates inside the stator, the rotor gradually forces fluid up the rubber cavity.
Such pumps can develop very high pressure at low volumes at a rate of 90 PSI per stage on water for standard configurations.
Named after the Roots brothers who invented it, this lobe pump displaces the fluid trapped between two long helical rotors, each fitted into the other when perpendicular at 90°, rotating inside a triangular shaped sealing line configuration, both at the point of suction and at the point of discharge.
This design produces a continuous flow with equal volume and no vortex.
It can work at low pulsation rates, and offers gentle performance that some applications require.
High capacity industrial air compressors.
Roots superchargers on internal combustion engines.
A brand of civil defense siren, the Federal Signal Corporation's Thunderbolt.
A peristaltic pump is a type of positive-displacement pump.
It contains fluid within a flexible tube fitted inside a circular pump casing (though linear peristaltic pumps have been made).
A number of rollers, shoes, or wipers attached to a rotor compress the flexible tube.
As the rotor turns, the part of the tube under compression closes (or occludes), forcing the fluid through the tube.
Additionally, when the tube opens to its natural state after the passing of the cam it draws (restitution) fluid into the pump.
This process is called peristalsis and is used in many biological systems such as the gastrointestinal tract.
Plunger pumps are reciprocating positive-displacement pumps.
These consist of a cylinder with a reciprocating plunger.
The suction and discharge valves are mounted in the head of the cylinder.
In the suction stroke, the plunger retracts and the suction valves open causing suction of fluid into the cylinder.
In the forward stroke, the plunger pushes the liquid out of the discharge valve.
Efficiency and common problems: With only one cylinder in plunger pumps, the fluid flow varies between maximum flow when the plunger moves through the middle positions, and zero flow when the plunger is at the end positions.
A lot of energy is wasted when the fluid is accelerated in the piping system.
Vibration and water hammer may be a serious problem.
In general, the problems are compensated for by using two or more cylinders not working in phase with each other.
Centrifugal pumps are also susceptible to water hammer.
Triplex plunger pumps use three plungers, which reduces the pulsation relative to single reciprocating plunger pumps.
Adding a pulsation dampener on the pump outlet can further smooth the pump ripple, or ripple graph of a pump transducer.
The dynamic relationship of the high-pressure fluid and plunger generally requires high-quality plunger seals.
Plunger pumps with a larger number of plungers have the benefit of increased flow, or smoother flow without a pulsation damper.
The increase in moving parts and crankshaft load is one drawback.
Car washes often use these triplex-style plunger pumps (perhaps without pulsation dampers).
In 1968, William Bruggeman reduced the size of the triplex pump and increased the lifespan so that car washes could use equipment with smaller footprints.
Durable high-pressure seals, low-pressure seals and oil seals, hardened crankshafts, hardened connecting rods, thick ceramic plungers and heavier duty ball and roller bearings improve reliability in triplex pumps.
Triplex pumps now are in a myriad of markets across the world.
Triplex pumps with shorter lifetimes are commonplace to the home user.
A person who uses a home pressure washer for 10 hours a year may be satisfied with a pump that lasts 100 hours between rebuilds.
Industrial-grade or continuous duty triplex pumps on the other end of the quality spectrum may run for as much as 2,080 hours a year.
The oil and gas drilling industry uses massive semi-trailer-transported triplex pumps called mud pumps to pump drilling mud, which cools the drill bit and carries the cuttings back to the surface.
Drillers use triplex or even quintuplex pumps to inject water and solvents deep into shale in the extraction process called fracking.
Typically run on electricity compressed air, diaphragm pumps are relatively inexpensive and can perform a wide variety of duties, from pumping air into an aquarium, to liquids through a filter press.
Double-diaphragm pumps can handle viscous fluids and abrasive materials with a gentle pumping process ideal for transporting shear-sensitive media.
Impulse pumps use pressure created by gas (usually air).
In some impulse pumps the gas trapped in the liquid (usually water), is released and accumulated somewhere in the pump, creating a pressure that can push part of the liquid upwards.
Hydraulic ram pumps – kinetic energy of a low-head water supply is stored temporarily in an air-bubble hydraulic accumulator, then used to drive water to a higher head.
Pulser pumps – run with natural resources, by kinetic energy only.
Instead of a gas accumulation and releasing cycle, the pressure can be created by burning of hydrocarbons.
Such combustion driven pumps directly transmit the impulse from a combustion event through the actuation membrane to the pump fluid.
In order to allow this direct transmission, the pump needs to be almost entirely made of an elastomer (e.
Hence, the combustion causes the membrane to expand and thereby pumps the fluid out of the adjacent pumping chamber.
The first combustion-driven soft pump was developed by ETH Zurich.
A hydraulic ram is a water pump powered by hydropower.
It takes in water at relatively low pressure and high flow-rate and outputs water at a higher hydraulic-head and lower flow-rate.
The device uses the water hammer effect to develop pressure that lifts a portion of the input water that powers the pump to a point higher than where the water started.
The hydraulic ram is sometimes used in remote areas, where there is both a source of low-head hydropower, and a need for pumping water to a destination higher in elevation than the source.
In this situation, the ram is often useful, since it requires no outside source of power other than the kinetic energy of flowing water.
Rotodynamic pumps (or dynamic pumps) are a type of velocity pump in which kinetic energy is added to the fluid by increasing the flow velocity.
This increase in energy is converted to a gain in potential energy (pressure) when the velocity is reduced prior to or as the flow exits the pump into the discharge pipe.
This conversion of kinetic energy to pressure is explained by the First law of thermodynamics, or more specifically by Bernoulli's principle.
Dynamic pumps can be further subdivided according to the means in which the velocity gain is achieved.
A practical difference between dynamic and positive-displacement pumps is how they operate under closed valve conditions.
Positive-displacement pumps physically displace fluid, so closing a valve downstream of a positive-displacement pump produces a continual pressure build up that can cause mechanical failure of pipeline or pump.
Dynamic pumps differ in that they can be safely operated under closed valve conditions (for short periods of time).
Such a pump is also referred to as a centrifugal pump.
The fluid enters along the axis or center, is accelerated by the impeller and exits at right angles to the shaft (radially); an example is the centrifugal fan, which is commonly used to implement a vacuum cleaner.
Another type of radial-flow pump is a vortex pump.
The liquid in them moves in tangential direction around the working wheel.
The conversion from the mechanical energy of motor into the potential energy of flow comes by means of multiple whirls, which are excited by the impeller in the working channel of the pump.
Generally, a radial-flow pump operates at higher pressures and lower flow rates than an axial- or a mixed-flow pump.
These are also referred to as all-fluid pumps.
The fluid is pushed outward or inward to move fluid axially.
They operate at much lower pressures and higher flow rates than radial-flow (centrifugal) pumps.
Axial-flow pumps cannot be run up to speed without special precaution.
If at a low flow rate, the total head rise and high torque associated with this pipe would mean that the starting torque would have to become a function of acceleration for the whole mass of liquid in the pipe system.
Mixed-flow pumps function as a compromise between radial and axial-flow pumps.
The fluid experiences both radial acceleration and lift and exits the impeller somewhere between 0 and 90 degrees from the axial direction.
As a consequence mixed-flow pumps operate at higher pressures than axial-flow pumps while delivering higher discharges than radial-flow pumps.
The exit angle of the flow dictates the pressure head-discharge characteristic in relation to radial and mixed-flow.
Also known as drag, friction, liquid-ring pump, peripheral, traction, turbulence, or vortex pumps, regenerative turbine pumps are a class of rotodynamic pump that operates at high head pressures, typically 4–20 bars (400–2,000 kPa; 58–290 psi).
The pump has an impeller with a number of vanes or paddles which spins in a cavity.
The suction port and pressure ports are located at the perimeter of the cavity and are isolated by a barrier called a stripper, which allows only the tip channel (fluid between the blades) to recirculate, and forces any fluid in the side channel (fluid in the cavity outside of the blades) through the pressure port.
In a regenerative turbine pump, as fluid spirals repeatedly from a vane into the side channel and back to the next vane, kinetic energy is imparted to the periphery, thus pressure builds with each spiral, in a manner similar to a regenerative blower.
As regenerative turbine pumps cannot become vapor locked, they are commonly applied to volatile, hot, or cryogenic fluid transport.
However, as tolerances are typically tight, they are vulnerable to solids or particles causing jamming or rapid wear.
Efficiency is typically low, and pressure and power consumption typically decrease with flow.
Additionally, pumping direction can be reversed by reversing direction of spin.
A side-channel pump has a suction disk, an impeller, and a discharge disk.
This uses a jet, often of steam, to create a low pressure.
This low pressure sucks in fluid and propels it into a higher-pressure region.
Gravity pumps include the syphon and Heron's fountain.
The hydraulic ram is also sometimes called a gravity pump.
In a gravity pump the fluid is lifted by gravitational force.
Steam pumps have been for a long time mainly of historical interest.
They include any type of pump powered by a steam engine and also pistonless pumps such as Thomas Savery's or the Pulsometer steam pump.
Recently there has been a resurgence of interest in low-power solar steam pumps for use in smallholder irrigation in developing countries.
Previously small steam engines have not been viable because of escalating inefficiencies as vapour engines decrease in size.
However the use of modern engineering materials coupled with alternative engine configurations has meant that these types of system are now a cost-effective opportunity.
Valveless pumping assists in fluid transport in various biomedical and engineering systems.
In a valveless pumping system, no valves (or physical occlusions) are present to regulate the flow direction.
The fluid pumping efficiency of a valveless system, however, is not necessarily lower than that having valves.
In fact, many fluid-dynamical systems in nature and engineering more or less rely upon valveless pumping to transport the working fluids therein.
For instance, blood circulation in the cardiovascular system is maintained to some extent even when the heart's valves fail.
Meanwhile, the embryonic vertebrate heart begins pumping blood long before the development of discernible chambers and valves.
Similar to blood circulation in one direction, bird respiratory systems pump air in one direction in rigid lungs, but without any physiological valve.
In microfluidics, valveless impedance pumps have been fabricated, and are expected to be particularly suitable for handling sensitive biofluids.
Ink jet printers operating on the piezoelectric transducer principle also use valveless pumping.
The pump chamber is emptied through the printing jet due to reduced flow impedance in that direction and refilled by capillary action.
Examining pump repair records and mean time between failures (MTBF) is of great importance to responsible and conscientious pump users.
In view of that fact, the preface to the 2006 Pump User's Handbook alludes to "pump failure" statistics.
For the sake of convenience, these failure statistics often are translated into MTBF (in this case, installed life before failure).
In early 2005, Gordon Buck, John Crane Inc.
A total of 15 operating plants having nearly 15,000 pumps were included in the survey.
The smallest of these plants had about 100 pumps; several plants had over 2000.
All facilities were located in the United States.
In addition, considered as "new", others as "renewed" and still others as "established".
Many of these plants—but not all—had an alliance arrangement with John Crane.
In some cases, the alliance contract included having a John Crane Inc.
Not all plants are refineries, however, and different results occur elsewhere.
In chemical plants, pumps have historically been "throw-away" items as chemical attack limits life.
Things have improved in recent years, but the somewhat restricted space available in "old" DIN and ASME-standardized stuffing boxes places limits on the type of seal that fits.
Unless the pump user upgrades the seal chamber, the pump only accommodates more compact and simple versions.
Without this upgrading, lifetimes in chemical installations are generally around 50 to 60 percent of the refinery values.
Unscheduled maintenance is often one of the most significant costs of ownership, and failures of mechanical seals and bearings are among the major causes.
Keep in mind the potential value of selecting pumps that cost more initially, but last much longer between repairs.
The MTBF of a better pump may be one to four years longer than that of its non-upgraded counterpart.
Consider that published average values of avoided pump failures range from US$2600 to US$12,000.
This does not include lost opportunity costs.
One pump fire occurs per 1000 failures.
Having fewer pump failures means having fewer destructive pump fires.
As has been noted, a typical pump failure, based on actual year 2002 reports, costs US$5,000 on average.
This includes costs for material, parts, labor and overhead.
Extending a pump's MTBF from 12 to 18 months would save US$1,667 per year — which might be greater than the cost to upgrade the centrifugal pump's reliability.
Pumps are used throughout society for a variety of purposes.
Early applications includes the use of the windmill or watermill to pump water.
Today, the pump is used for irrigation, water supply, gasoline supply, air conditioning systems, refrigeration (usually called a compressor), chemical movement, sewage movement, flood control, marine services, etc.
Because of the wide variety of applications, pumps have a plethora of shapes and sizes: from very large to very small, from handling gas to handling liquid, from high pressure to low pressure, and from high volume to low volume.
Typically, a liquid pump cannot simply draw air.
The feed line of the pump and the internal body surrounding the pumping mechanism must first be filled with the liquid that requires pumping: An operator must introduce liquid into the system to initiate the pumping, known as priming the pump.
Loss of prime is usually due to ingestion of air into the pump, or evaporation of the working fluid if the pump is used infrequently.
Clearances and displacement ratios in pumps for liquids are insufficient for pumping compressible gas, so air or other gasses in the pump can not be evacuated by the pump's action alone.
This is the case with most velocity (rotodynamic) pumps — for example, centrifugal pumps.
For such pumps, the position of the pump and intake tubing should be lower than the suction point so it is primed by gravity; otherwise the pump should be manually filled with liquid or a secondary pump should be used until all air is removed from the suction line and the pump casing.
Liquid ring pumps have a dedicated intake for the priming liquid separate from the intake of the fluid being pumped, as the fluid being pumped may be a gas or mix of gas, liquid, and solids.
For these pumps the priming liquid intake must be supplied continuously (either by gravity or pressure), however the intake for the fluid being pumped is capable of drawing a vacuum equivalent to the boiling point of the priming liquid.
Positive–displacement pumps, however, tend to have sufficiently tight sealing between the moving parts and the casing or housing of the pump that they can be described as self-priming.
Such pumps can also serve as priming pumps, so-called when they are used to fulfill that need for other pumps in lieu of action taken by a human operator.
One sort of pump once common worldwide was a hand-powered water pump, or 'pitcher pump'.
It was commonly installed over community water wells in the days before piped water supplies.
In parts of the British Isles, it was often called the parish pump.
Though such community pumps are no longer common, people still used the expression parish pump to describe a place or forum where matters of local interest are discussed.
Because water from pitcher pumps is drawn directly from the soil, it is more prone to contamination.
If such water is not filtered and purified, consumption of it might lead to gastrointestinal or other water-borne diseases.
A notorious case is the 1854 Broad Street cholera outbreak.
At the time it was not known how cholera was transmitted, but physician John Snow suspected contaminated water and had the handle of the public pump he suspected removed; the outbreak then subsided.
Modern hand-operated community pumps are considered the most sustainable low-cost option for safe water supply in resource-poor settings, often in rural areas in developing countries.
A hand pump opens access to deeper groundwater that is often not polluted and also improves the safety of a well by protecting the water source from contaminated buckets.
Pumps such as the Afridev pump are designed to be cheap to build and install, and easy to maintain with simple parts.
However, scarcity of spare parts for these types of pumps in some regions of Africa has diminished their utility for these areas.
Multiphase pumping applications, also referred to as tri-phase, have grown due to increased oil drilling activity.
In addition, the economics of multiphase production is attractive to upstream operations as it leads to simpler, smaller in-field installations, reduced equipment costs and improved production rates.
In essence, the multiphase pump can accommodate all fluid stream properties with one piece of equipment, which has a smaller footprint.
Often, two smaller multiphase pumps are installed in series rather than having just one massive pump.
A rotodynamic pump with one single shaft that requires two mechanical seals, this pump uses an open-type axial impeller.
It is often called a Poseidon pump, and can be described as a cross between an axial compressor and a centrifugal pump.
The twin-screw pump is constructed of two inter-meshing screws that move the pumped fluid.
Twin screw pumps are often used when pumping conditions contain high gas volume fractions and fluctuating inlet conditions.
Four mechanical seals are required to seal the two shafts.
Progressive Cavity Pumps are well suited to pump sludge, slurries, viscous, and shear sensitive fluids.
Progressive cavity pumps are single-screw types use in surface and downhole oil production.
They serve a vast arrange of industries and applications ranging from Wastewater Treatment, Pulp and Paper, oil and gas, mining, and oil and gas.
These pumps are basically multistage centrifugal pumps and are widely used in oil well applications as a method for artificial lift.
These pumps are usually specified when the pumped fluid is mainly liquid.
A buffer tank is often installed upstream of the pump suction nozzle in case of a slug flow.
The buffer tank breaks the energy of the liquid slug, smooths any fluctuations in the incoming flow and acts as a sand trap.
As the name indicates, multiphase pumps and their mechanical seals can encounter a large variation in service conditions such as changing process fluid composition, temperature variations, high and low operating pressures and exposure to abrasive/erosive media.
The challenge is selecting the appropriate mechanical seal arrangement and support system to ensure maximized seal life and its overall effectiveness.
Pumps are commonly rated by horsepower, volumetric flow rate, outlet pressure in metres (or feet) of head, inlet suction in suction feet (or metres) of head.
The head can be simplified as the number of feet or metres the pump can raise or lower a column of water at atmospheric pressure.
From an initial design point of view, engineers often use a quantity termed the specific speed to identify the most suitable pump type for a particular combination of flow rate and head.
Net Positive Suction Head (NPSH) is crucial for pump performance.
NPSHr (Required): The Head required for the pump to operate without cavitation issues.
NPSHa (Available): The actual pressure provided by the system (e.
For optimal pump operation, NPSHa must always exceed NPSHr.
This ensures the pump has enough pressure to prevent cavitation, a damaging condition.
The power imparted into a fluid increases the energy of the fluid per unit volume.
Thus the power relationship is between the conversion of the mechanical energy of the pump mechanism and the fluid elements within the pump.
In general, this is governed by a series of simultaneous differential equations, known as the Navier–Stokes equations.
However a more simple equation relating only the different energies in the fluid, known as Bernoulli's equation can be used.
The total pressure may have gravitational, static pressure and kinetic energy components; i.
The efficiency of the pump depends upon the pump's configuration and operating conditions (such as rotational speed, fluid density and viscosity etc.
For a typical "pumping" configuration, the work is imparted on the fluid, and is thus positive.
For the fluid imparting the work on the pump (i.
Power required to drive the pump is determined by dividing the output power by the pump efficiency.
Furthermore, this definition encompasses pumps with no moving parts, such as a siphon.
Pump efficiency is defined as the ratio of the power imparted on the fluid by the pump in relation to the power supplied to drive the pump.
Its value is not fixed for a given pump, efficiency is a function of the discharge and therefore also operating head.
For centrifugal pumps, the efficiency tends to increase with flow rate up to a point midway through the operating range (peak efficiency or Best Efficiency Point (BEP) ) and then declines as flow rates rise further.
Pump performance data such as this is usually supplied by the manufacturer before pump selection.
Pump efficiencies tend to decline over time due to wear (e.
When a system includes a centrifugal pump, an important design issue is matching the head loss-flow characteristic with the pump so that it operates at or close to the point of its maximum efficiency.
Pump efficiency is an important aspect and pumps should be regularly tested.
Thermodynamic pump testing is one method.
Most large pumps have a minimum flow requirement below which the pump may be damaged by overheating, impeller wear, vibration, seal failure, drive shaft damage or poor performance.
A minimum flow protection system ensures that the pump is not operated below the minimum flow rate.
The system protects the pump even if it is shut-in or dead-headed, that is, if the discharge line is completely closed.
The simplest minimum flow system is a pipe running from the pump discharge line back to the suction line.
This line is fitted with an orifice plate sized to allow the pump minimum flow to pass.
The arrangement ensures that the minimum flow is maintained, although it is wasteful as it recycles fluid even when the flow through the pump exceeds the minimum flow.
A more sophisticated, but more costly, system (see diagram) comprises a flow measuring device (FE) in the pump discharge which provides a signal into a flow controller (FIC) which actuates a flow control valve (FCV) in the recycle line.
If the measured flow exceeds the minimum flow then the FCV is closed.
If the measured flow falls below the minimum flow the FCV opens to maintain the minimum flowrate.
As the fluids are recycled the kinetic energy of the pump increases the temperature of the fluid.
For many pumps this added heat energy is dissipated through the pipework.
However, for large industrial pumps, such as oil pipeline pumps, a recycle cooler is provided in the recycle line to cool the fluids to the normal suction temperature.
Alternatively the recycled fluids may be returned to upstream of the export cooler in an oil refinery, oil terminal, or offshore installation.
Australian Pump Manufacturers' Association.
Australian Pump Technical Handbook, 3rd edition.
Canberra: Australian Pump Manufacturers' Association, 1987.
Pump Application Engineering.
McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Popular Science, February 1919, pages 83–84.
Article about how a homeowner can easily build a pressurized home water system that does not use electricity.
Hydraulic engineering as a sub-discipline of civil engineering is concerned with the flow and conveyance of fluids, principally water and sewage.
One feature of these systems is the extensive use of gravity as the motive force to cause the movement of the fluids.
This area of civil engineering is intimately related to the design of bridges, dams, channels, canals, and levees, and to both sanitary and environmental engineering.
Hydraulic engineering is the application of the principles of fluid mechanics to problems dealing with the collection, storage, control, transport, regulation, measurement, and use of water.
Before beginning a hydraulic engineering project, one must figure out how much water is involved.
The hydraulic engineer is concerned with the transport of sediment by the river, the interaction of the water with its alluvial boundary, and the occurrence of scour and deposition.
A few examples of the fundamental principles of hydraulic engineering include fluid mechanics, fluid flow, behavior of real fluids, hydrology, pipelines, open channel hydraulics, mechanics of sediment transport, physical modeling, hydraulic machines, and drainage hydraulics.
Fundamentals of Hydraulic Engineering defines hydrostatics as the study of fluids at rest.
In a fluid at rest, there exists a force, known as pressure, that acts upon the fluid's surroundings.
This pressure, measured in N/m2, is not constant throughout the body of fluid.
Pressure, p, in a given body of fluid, increases with an increase in depth.
Four basic devices for pressure measurement are a piezometer, manometer, differential manometer, Bourdon gauge, as well as an inclined manometer.
On undisturbed submerged bodies, pressure acts along all surfaces of a body in a liquid, causing equal perpendicular forces in the body to act against the pressure of the liquid.
This reaction is known as equilibrium.
More advanced applications of pressure are that on plane surfaces, curved surfaces, dams, and quadrant gates, just to name a few.
The main difference between an ideal fluid and a real fluid is that for ideal flow p1 = p2 and for real flow p1 > p2.
Ideal fluid is incompressible and has no viscosity.
Real fluid has viscosity.
Ideal fluid is only an imaginary fluid as all fluids that exist have some viscosity.
A viscous fluid will deform continuously under a shear force by the pascles law, whereas an ideal fluid does not deform.
The various effects of disturbance on a viscous flow are a stable, transition and unstable.
For an ideal fluid, Bernoulli's equation holds along streamlines.
As the flow comes into contact with the plate, the layer of fluid actually "adheres" to a solid surface.
There is then a considerable shearing action between the layer of fluid on the plate surface and the second layer of fluid.
The second layer is therefore forced to decelerate (though it is not quite brought to rest), creating a shearing action with the third layer of fluid, and so on.
As the fluid passes further along with the plate, the zone in which shearing action occurs tends to spread further outwards.
This zone is known as the "boundary layer".
The flow outside the boundary layer is free of shear and viscous-related forces so it is assumed to act as an ideal fluid.
The intermolecular cohesive forces in a fluid are not great enough to hold fluid together.
Hence a fluid will flow under the action of the slightest stress and flow will continue as long as the stress is present.
The flow inside the layer can be either vicious or turbulent, depending on Reynolds number.
Common topics of design for hydraulic engineers include hydraulic structures such as dams, levees, water distribution networks including both domestic and fire water supply, distribution and automatic sprinkler systems, water collection networks, sewage collection networks, storm water management, sediment transport, and various other topics related to transportation engineering and geotechnical engineering.
Equations developed from the principles of fluid dynamics and fluid mechanics are widely utilized by other engineering disciplines such as mechanical, aeronautical and even traffic engineers.
Related branches include hydrology and rheology while related applications include hydraulic modeling, flood mapping, catchment flood management plans, shoreline management plans, estuarine strategies, coastal protection, and flood alleviation.
Earliest uses of hydraulic engineering were to irrigate crops and dates back to the Middle East and Africa.
Controlling the movement and supply of water for growing food has been used for many thousands of years.
One of the earliest hydraulic machines, the water clock was used in the early 2nd millennium BC.
Other early examples of using gravity to move water include the Qanat system in ancient Persia and the very similar Turpan water system in ancient China as well as irrigation canals in Peru.
In ancient China, hydraulic engineering was highly developed, and engineers constructed massive canals with levees and dams to channel the flow of water for irrigation, as well as locks to allow ships to pass through.
Sunshu Ao is considered the first Chinese hydraulic engineer.
Another important Hydraulic Engineer in China, Ximen Bao was credited of starting the practice of large scale canal irrigation during the Warring States period (481 BC–221 BC), even today hydraulic engineers remain a respectable position in China.
In the Archaic epoch of the Philippines, hydraulic engineering also developed specially in the Island of Luzon, the Ifugaos of the mountainous region of the Cordilleras built irrigations, dams and hydraulic works and the famous Banaue Rice Terraces as a way for assisting in growing crops around 1000 BC.
These Rice Terraces are 2,000-year-old terraces that were carved into the mountains of Ifugao in the Philippines by ancestors of the indigenous people.
The Rice Terraces are commonly referred to as the "Eighth Wonder of the World".
It is commonly thought that the terraces were built with minimal equipment, largely by hand.
The terraces are located approximately 1500 metres (5000 ft) above sea level.
They are fed by an ancient irrigation system from the rainforests above the terraces.
It is said that if the steps were put end to end, it would encircle half the globe.
Eupalinos of Megara was an ancient Greek engineer who built the Tunnel of Eupalinos on Samos in the 6th century BC, an important feat of both civil and hydraulic engineering.
The civil engineering aspect of this tunnel was that it was dug from both ends which required the diggers to maintain an accurate path so that the two tunnels met and that the entire effort maintained a sufficient slope to allow the water to flow.
Hydraulic engineering was highly emphasized in the Inca empire, they had the ability to manipulate water.
In Típon the creation of terraces, water was able to reach different sections reaching elite residence and continues to be distributed in lower levels towards the agriculture, being able to maintain a whole community through the terraces.
Hydraulic engineering was highly developed in Europe under the aegis of the Roman Empire where it was especially applied to the construction and maintenance of aqueducts to supply water to and remove sewage from their cities.
In addition to supplying the needs of their citizens they used hydraulic mining methods to prospect and extract alluvial gold deposits in a technique known as hushing, and applied the methods to other ores such as those of tin and lead.
In the 15th century, the Somali Ajuran Empire was the only hydraulic empire in Africa.
As a hydraulic empire, the Ajuran State monopolized the water resources of the Jubba and Shebelle Rivers.
Through hydraulic engineering, it also constructed many of the limestone wells and cisterns of the state that are still operative and in use today.
The rulers developed new systems for agriculture and taxation, which continued to be used in parts of the Horn of Africa as late as the 19th century.
Further advances in hydraulic engineering occurred in the Muslim world between the 8th and 16th centuries, during what is known as the Islamic Golden Age.
Of particular importance was the 'water management technological complex' which was central to the Islamic Green Revolution.
The various components of this 'toolkit' were developed in different parts of the Afro-Eurasian landmass, both within and beyond the Islamic world.
However, it was in the medieval Islamic lands where the technological complex was assembled and standardized, and subsequently diffused to the rest of the Old World.
Under the rule of a single Islamic caliphate, different regional hydraulic technologies were assembled into "an identifiable water management technological complex that was to have a global impact.
Other original Islamic developments included the saqiya with a flywheel effect from Islamic Spain, the reciprocating suction pump and crankshaft-connecting rod mechanism from Iraq, and the geared and hydropowered water supply system from Syria.
In many respects, the fundamentals of hydraulic engineering have not changed since ancient times.
Liquids are still moved for the most part by gravity through systems of canals and aqueducts, though the supply reservoirs may now be filled using pumps.
The need for water has steadily increased from ancient times and the role of the hydraulic engineer is a critical one in supplying it.
For example, without the efforts of people like William Mulholland the Los Angeles area would not have been able to grow as it has because it simply does not have enough local water to support its population.
The same is true for many of our world's largest cities.
In much the same way, the central valley of California could not have become such an important agricultural region without effective water management and distribution for irrigation.
In a somewhat parallel way to what happened in California, the creation of the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) brought work and prosperity to the South by building dams to generate cheap electricity and control flooding in the region, making rivers navigable and generally modernizing life in the region.
Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) performed experiments, investigated and speculated on waves and jets, eddies and streamlining.
Isaac Newton (1642–1727) by formulating the laws of motion and his law of viscosity, in addition to developing the calculus, paved the way for many great developments in fluid mechanics.
Using Newton's laws of motion, numerous 18th-century mathematicians solved many frictionless (zero-viscosity) flow problems.
However, most flows are dominated by viscous effects, so engineers of the 17th and 18th centuries found the inviscid flow solutions unsuitable, and by experimentation they developed empirical equations, thus establishing the science of hydraulics.
Late in the 19th century, the importance of dimensionless numbers and their relationship to turbulence was recognized, and dimensional analysis was born.
In 1904 Ludwig Prandtl published a key paper, proposing that the flow fields of low-viscosity fluids be divided into two zones, namely a thin, viscosity-dominated boundary layer near solid surfaces, and an effectively inviscid outer zone away from the boundaries.
This concept explained many former paradoxes and enabled subsequent engineers to analyze far more complex flows.
However, we still have no complete theory for the nature of turbulence, and so modern fluid mechanics continues to be combination of experimental results and theory.
The modern hydraulic engineer uses the same kinds of computer-aided design (CAD) tools as many of the other engineering disciplines while also making use of technologies like computational fluid dynamics to perform the calculations to accurately predict flow characteristics, GPS mapping to assist in locating the best paths for installing a system and laser-based surveying tools to aid in the actual construction of a system.
Zipparro, Hans Hasen (Eds), Davis' Handbook of Applied Hydraulics, Mcgraw-Hill, 4th Edition (1992), ISBN 0070730024, at Amazon.
Classification of Organics in Secondary Effluents.
Environmental Science and Technology, 5, pp.
Viollet, Pierre-Louis (2017).
Water Engineering in Ancient Civilizations: 5,000 Years of History.
Translated by Holly, Forrest M.
Hydraulic Engineering in the 21st Century : Where to ?
